	CHAPTER ONE

	Big Brother Is Watching You

	It was a bright, cold day in April and the clocks were striking thirteen. Winston Smith hurried home to Victory Mansions with his head down to escape the terrible wind. A cloud of dust blew inside with him, and the hall smelled of dust and yesterday's food.

	At the end of the hall, a poster covered one wall. It showed an enormous face, more than a metre wide: the face of a handsome man of about forty-five, with a large, black moustache. The man's eyes seemed to follow Winston as he moved. Below the face were the words BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU.

	Winston went up the stairs. He did not even try the lift. It rarely worked and at the moment the electricity was switched off during the day to save money for Hate Week. The flat was on the seventh floor and Winston, who was thirty-nine and had a bad knee, went slowly, resting several times on the way. Winston was a small man and looked even smaller in the blue overalls of the Party. His hair was fair and the skin on his face, which used to be pink, was red and rough from cheap soap, old razor blades and the cold of the winter that had just ended.

	Inside his flat, a voice was reading out a list of figures for last year's production of iron. The voice came from a metal square, a telescreen, in the right-hand wall. Winston turned it down, but there was no way of turning it off completely.

	He moved to the window. Outside, the world looked cold. The wind blew dust and bits of paper around in the street and there seemed to be no colour in anything, except in the posters that were everywhere. The face with the black moustache looked down from every corner. There was one on the house opposite. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, it said, and the eyes looked into Winston's.

	Behind him the voice from the telescreen was still talking about iron. There was now even more iron in Oceania than the Ninth Three-Year Plan had demanded. The telescreen had a microphone, so the Thought Police could listen to Winston at any time of the day or night. They could also watch him through the telescreen. Nobody knew how often they actually did that but everybody behaved correctly all the time because the Thought Police might be watching and listening.

	Winston kept his back to the telescreen. It was safer that way - they couldn't see your face. He looked out over London, the biggest city in this part of Oceania. The nineteenth-century houses were all falling down. There were holes in the streets where the bombs had fallen. Had it always been like this? He tried to think back to the time when he was a boy, but he could remember nothing.

	He stared at the Ministry of Truth, where he worked. It was an enormous white building, three hundred metres high. You could see the white roof, high above the houses, even a kilometre away. From Winston's flat it was just possible to see the three slogans of the Party written in enormous letters on the side of the building:

	WAR IS PEACE

	FREEDOM IS SLAVERY

	IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH

	The Ministry of Truth was called Minitrue in Newspeak, the new language of Oceania. Minitrue, it was said, had more than three thousand rooms above the ground and a similar number below. The people there worked mainly on news and entertainment. High above the surrounding buildings, Winston could also see the Ministry of Peace, where they worked on war. It was called Minipax in Newspeak. And the Ministry of Plenty - Miniplenty - which was responsible for the economy. And he could see the Ministry of Love - Miniluv - which was responsible for law and order.

	The Ministry of Love was the really frightening one. There were no windows in it. Nobody could get anywhere near it unless they had business there. There were guards with guns in black uniforms even in the streets half a kilometre away.

	Winston turned round quickly. He smiled. It was a good idea to look happy when you were facing the telescreen. He went to his small kitchen. He had not had lunch in the canteen before he left work, but there was no food there except a piece of dark, hard bread for tomorrow's breakfast. He poured himself a cup of colourless, oily gin and drank it down like medicine. It burned him inside, but he felt more cheerful afterwards.

	He went back to the living room and sat down at a small table to the left of the telescreen. It was the only place in the room where the telescreen could not see him. From a drawer in the table he took out a pen and a big diary with beautiful cream paper, which he had bought in an old-fashioned shop in a poor part of the town. Party members like Winston were not allowed to go into ordinary shops, but many of them did. It was the only way to get things like razor blades.

	Winston opened the diary. This was not illegal. Nothing was illegal, as there were no laws now. But if the diary was found they would punish him with death or with twenty-five years in a prison camp. He took the pen in his hand, then stopped. He felt sick. It was a decisive act to start writing.



	***



	Earlier that morning, a terrible noise from the big telescreen at the Ministry of Truth had called all the workers to the centre of the hall for the Two Minutes Hate. The face of Emmanuel Goldstein, Enemy of the People, filled the telescreen. It was a thin, clever face, with its white hair and small beard, but there was something unpleasant about it. Goldstein began to speak in his sheep-like voice: criticising the Party, making nasty attacks on Big Brother, demanding peace with Eurasia.

	In the past (nobody knew exactly when) Goldstein had been almost as important in the Party as Big Brother himself, but then he had worked against the Party. Before he could be punished with death, he had escaped - nobody knew how, exactly. Somewhere he was still alive, and all crimes against the Party came from his teaching.

	Behind Goldstein's face on the telescreen were thousands of Eurasian soldiers. Oceania was always at war with either Eurasia or Eastasia. That changed, but the hate for Goldstein never did. The Thought Police found his spies every day. They were called 'the Brotherhood', people said, although Winston sometimes asked himself if the Brotherhood really existed. Goldstein had also written a book, a terrible book, a book against the Party. It had no title; it was just known as the book.

	As Goldstein's face filled the telescreen and Eurasian soldiers marched behind him, the Hate grew. People jumped up and down, shouting and screaming so they could not hear Goldstein's voice. Winston was shouting too; it was impossible not to. A girl behind him, with thick, dark hair was screaming 'Pig! Pig!' at Goldstein, and suddenly she picked up a heavy Newspeak dictionary and threw it at the telescreen. It hit Goldstein on the nose and fell to the floor.

	Winston had often seen this girl at the Ministry but he had never spoken to her. He did not know her name, but he knew she worked in the Fiction Department. He had seen her with tools so he guessed she was a mechanic on the story-writing machines. She was a confident-looking girl of about twenty-seven, and she walked quickly. She wore the narrow red belt of the Young People's League tied tightly round her overalls.

	Winston had disliked her from the first moment he saw her. He disliked nearly all women, especially young and pretty ones. The young women were always most loyal to the Party and were happiest to spy on others. But this girl was especially dangerous, he thought. Once, when he had seen her in the canteen, she had looked at him in a way that filled him with black terror. He even thought she might be working for the Thought Police. As the screaming at Goldstein increased, Winston's dislike of the girl turned to hate. He hated her because she was young and pretty.

	Suddenly he noticed someone else, sitting near the girl, wearing the black overalls of an Inner Party member. O'Brien was a large man with a thick neck and glasses. Although he looked frightening, Winston was interested in him. There was sometimes an intelligence in his face that suggested - perhaps - that he might question the official Party beliefs.

	Winston had seen O'Brien about twelve times in almost as many years. Years ago he had dreamed about O'Brien. He was in a dark room and O'Brien had said to him, 'We shall meet in the place where there is no dark.' Winston did not know what that meant, but he was sure it would happen, one day.

	The Hate increased. The screaming increased. The voice and face of Goldstein became the voice and face of a real sheep. Then the sheep-face became a Eurasian soldier, walking towards them with his gun, so close that some people shut their eyes for a second and moved back in their seats. But at the same moment the soldier became the face of Big Brother, black-haired, moustached, filling the telescreen. Nobody could hear what Big Brother said, but it was enough that he was speaking to them. Then the face of Big Brother disappeared from the telescreen and the Party slogans came up instead:

	WAR IS PEACE

	FREEDOM IS SLAVERY

	IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH

	Then everybody started shouting 'B-B! B-B!' again and again, slowly, with a long pause between the first B and the second. Of course Winston shouted too - you had to. But there was a second when the look on his face showed what he was thinking. And at that exact moment his eyes met O'Brien's.

	O'Brien was pushing his glasses up his nose. But Winston knew - yes he knew - that O'Brien was thinking the same thing as he was. 'I am with you,' O'Brien seemed to say to him. 'I hate all this too.' And then the moment of intelligence was gone and O'Brien's face looked like everybody else's.



	***



	Winston wrote the date in his diary: April 4th 1984. Then he stopped. He did not know definitely that this was 1984. He was thirty-nine, he believed - he had been born in 1944 or 1945. But nobody could be sure of dates, not really.

	'Who am I writing this diary for?' he asked himself suddenly. For the future, for the unborn. But if the future was like the present, it would not listen to him. And if it was different, his situation would be meaningless.

	The telescreen was playing marching music. What had he intended to say? Winston stared at the page, then began to write: Freedom is the freedom to say that two and two make four. If you have that, everything else follows... He stopped. Should he go on? If he wrote more or did not write more, the result would be the same. The Thought Police would get him. Even before he wrote anything, his crime was clear. Thoughtcrime, they called it.

	It was always at night - the rough hand on your shoulder, the lights in your face. People just disappeared, always during the night. And then your name disappeared, your existence was denied and then forgotten. You were, in Newspeak, vaporized. Suddenly he wanted to scream. He started writing, fast:

	DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER

	DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER

	DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER

	There was a knock on the door. Already! He sat as quietly as a mouse, hoping that they would go away. But no, there was another knock. He could not delay - that would be the worst thing he could do. His heart was racing but even now his face, from habit, probably showed nothing.

	He got up and walked heavily towards the door.



	CHAPTER TWO

	The Spies

	As he opened the door, Winston saw that he had left the diary open on the table. DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER was written in it, in letters you could almost read across the room.

	But everything was all right. A small, sad-looking woman was standing outside.

	'Oh, Comrade Smith,' she said, in a dull little voice, 'do you think you could come across and help me with our kitchen sink? The water isn't running away and...'

	It was Mrs Parsons, his neighbour. She was about thirty but looked much older. Winston followed her into her flat. These repairs happened almost daily. The Victory Mansions flats were old, built in about 1930, and they were falling to pieces. Unless you did the repairs yourself, the Party had to agree to them. It could take two years to get new glass in a window.

	'Tom isn't home,' Mrs Parsons explained.

	The Parsons' flat was bigger than Winston's and unattractive in a different way. Everything was broken. There were sports clothes and sports equipment all over the floor, and dirty dishes on the table. On the walls were the red flags of the Young People's League and the Spies and a full-sized poster of Big Brother. There was the usual smell of old food, but also the smell of old sweat. In another room someone was singing with the marching music that was still coming from the telescreen.

	'It's the children,' said Mrs Parsons, looking in fear at the door to the other room. 'They haven't been out today and of course...' She often stopped without finishing her sentences.

	In the kitchen, the sink was full of dirty green water.

	'Of course if Tom was home...' Mrs Parsons started.

	Tom Parsons worked with Winston at the Ministry of Truth. He was a fat but active man who was unbelievably stupid and endlessly enthusiastic. He was a follower with no mind of his own - the type that the Party needed even more than they needed the Thought Police.

	At thirty-five Tom Parsons had only just been thrown out of the Young People's League, although he had wanted to stay. Before that he had continued in the Spies for a year beyond the official age. At the Ministry he had a job which needed no intelligence, but he worked for the Party every evening, organizing walks and other activities. The smell of his sweat filled every room he was in and stayed there after he had gone.

	Winston repaired the sink, taking out the unpleasant knot of hair that was stopping the water running away. He washed his hands and went back to the other room.

	'Put your hands up!' shouted a voice.

	A big, handsome boy of nine was pointing a toy gun at him. His small sister, about two years younger, pointed a piece of wood. Both were dressed in the blue, grey and red uniforms of the Spies. Winston put his hands up. The look of hate on the boy's face made him feel that it was not quite a game.

	'You're a Eurasian spy!' screamed the boy. 'You're a thoughtcriminal! I'll shoot you, I'll vaporize you!'

	Suddenly they were both running round him, shouting 'Spy! Thoughtcriminal!' The little girl did everything seconds after her older brother did it. It was frightening, like the games of young, dangerous wild animals that will soon be man-eaters. Winston could see that the boy really wanted to hit or kick him, and was nearly big enough to do so. He was glad that the gun in the boy's hand was only a toy.

	'They wanted to see the Eurasian prisoners hang. But I'm too busy to take them and Tom's at...'

	'We want to see them hang!' shouted the boy, and then the girl started shouting it too.

	Some Eurasian prisoners, guilty of war crimes against Oceania, were going to hang slowly in the park that evening. This happened every month or two and was a popular evening's entertainment. Children were often taken to see it.

	Winston said goodbye to Mrs Parsons and walked towards the door. He heard a loud noise as a bomb fell. About twenty or thirty of them were falling on London each week. Then he felt a terrible pain in the back of his neck. He turned and saw Mrs Parsons trying to take some sharp stones from her son's hand.

	'Goldstein!' screamed the boy.

	But Winston was most shocked by the look of helpless terror on Mrs Parsons' grey face.



	CHAPTER THREE

	The Ministry of Truth

	Winston pulled the speakwrite towards him and put on his glasses. To the right of the speakwrite there was a small hole, to the left a larger one. In the office wall there was a third hole, larger than the other two.

	Messages came to Winston's office through the smallest hole. Newspapers came to him through the middle hole. The largest hole was for waste paper; hot air carried that away. These large holes were called 'memory holes', for some reason.

	Today four messages had come through the smallest hole, onto his desk. The messages were about changes to the Times newspaper. For example, in Big Brother's speech in the Times of 17 March, he had said that South India was safe. The Eurasians would attack North Africa.

	This had not happened. The Eurasians had attacked South India, not North Africa. Winston had to re-write part of Big Brother's speech so you could read in the Times for 17 March that Big Brother had known about the attack before it happened.

	When Winston had finished, his changes to the Times went with the newspaper down the middle hole. A new edition would soon appear, with his changes. Every copy of the old edition would disappear. Destroyed. The message to Winston with the changes would disappear down the memory hole, to be burned.

	Every day newspapers, magazines, photographs, films, posters and books were all changed. The past was changed. The Party was always right. The Party had always been right. The Records Department, where they destroyed all the old copies of everything, was the largest department in the Ministry of Truth, but there was no truth. The new copies were not true and the old copies had not been true either.

	For example, the Ministry of Plenty had said they would make 145 million pairs of boots last year. Sixty-two million pairs were made. Winston changed 145 million to 57 million. So the Party had made five million more boots last year than they expected to. But it was possible that no boots at all were made last year. And it was possible that nobody knew or cared how many boots were made. You could read in the newspapers that five million extra pairs of boots had been made and you could see that half the people in Oceania had no boots.

	Winston looked around the office. A woman with fair hair spent all day looking for the names of people who had been vaporized. Each of them was, in Newspeak, an unperson. She took their names out of every newspaper, book, letter... Her own husband had been vaporized last year. She took his name out too.

	People disappeared from the newspapers when they were vaporized and they could also appear in the newspapers when they did not exist.

	Winston remembered Mr Ogilvy. He had appeared in the newspapers because he had led the sort of life the Party wanted. Ogilvy had joined the Spies at the age of six. At eleven he told the Thought Police that his uncle was a criminal. At seventeen he had been an organizer in the Young People's League. At nineteen he had invented a new bomb which had killed thirty-one Eurasians when it was first tried. At twenty-three, Ogilvy had died like a hero, fighting the Eurasians. There were photographs of Ogilvy, but there had been no Ogilvy. Not really. The photographs were made at the Ministry of Truth. Ogilvy was part of a past that never happened.

	Anything could be changed. A dreamy man with hairy ears called Ampleforth re-wrote old poems until they supported everything the Party believed in.

	But all this work, all these changes, were not the main work of the Ministry of Truth. Most workers in the Ministry were busy writing everything that the people of Oceania read or saw: all the newspapers, films, plays, poems, school books, telescreen programmes and songs, the Newspeak dictionaries and children's spelling books.

	After his morning's work, Winston went to the canteen. It was full, very noisy and smelled of cheap food and the gin that was sold from a hole in the wall.

	'Ah, I was looking for you,' said a voice behind Winston.

	It was Syme, his friend from the Dictionary Department. Perhaps 'friend' was not exactly the right word. You did not have friends these days, you had comrades. But some comrades were more interesting than others.

	Syme was working on the eleventh edition of the Newspeak Dictionary. He was a small man, even smaller than Winston, with dark hair and large eyes. These eyes were sad but they seemed to laugh at you and to search your face closely when he talked to you.

	'Have you got any razor blades?' asked Syme.

	'None,' said Winston quickly, perhaps too quickly. 'I've looked for them everywhere.' Everyone was asking for razor blades. There had been none in the Party shops for months. There was always something which the Party could not make enough of. Sometimes it was buttons, sometimes it was wool; now it was razor blades. 'I've been using the same blade for six weeks,' he lied. He actually had two new ones at home.

	The people waiting for food and gin moved forward, slowly. Winston and Syme took dirty plates from the pile.

	'Did you go to the park yesterday?' asked Syme. 'All the Eurasian prisoners were hanged.'

	'I was working,' said Winston. 'I'll see it at the cinema.'

	'That's not as good,' said Syme. His eyes looked hard at Winston's face. 'I know you,' they seemed to say. 'I know why you didn't go to see the prisoners die.'

	Syme was an enthusiastic supporter of the Party's decisions about war, prisoners, thoughtcrime, the deaths in the underground rooms below the Ministry of Love. Winston always tried to move conversation with him away from all that. Syme knew a lot about Newspeak and when he talked about language he was interesting.

	'The prisoners kicked when they were hanged,' said Syme. 'I always like that. It spoils it when their legs are tied together. And one of them had his tongue hanging right out of his mouth. It was quite a bright blue. I like that kind of detail.'

	'Next, please,' called the prole who was giving out the food, and Winston and Syme gave her their plates. She put some grey meat on each one. There was also some bread, a small piece of cheese and a cup of sugarless black coffee.

	'There's a table there, under that telescreen,' said Syme. 'Let's get a gin and sit there.'

	The gin was poured for them into big cups and they walked through the crowded canteen to a metal table. There were some pieces of meat on the table from the last person's meal.

	They ate in silence. Winston drank down his gin, which brought tears to his eyes.

	'How's the Dictionary?' he said, speaking loudly because of the noise.

	'I'm on the adjectives,' said Syme. 'It's wonderful work.' His eyes shone. He pushed his plate away, took his bread in one pale hand and his cheese in the other, and put his mouth near Winston's ear so he did not have to shout. 'The eleventh edition is the final one,' he said. 'We're building a new language. When we've finished, people like you will have to learn to speak again. You think the main job is inventing new words, don't you? Wrong! We're destroying words - lots of them, hundreds of them, every day. We're only leaving the really necessary ones, and they'll stay in use for a long time.'

	He ate his bread hungrily. His thin, dark face had come alive and his eyes were shining like the eyes of a man in love. 'It's a beautiful thing to destroy words,' he said. 'For example, a word like "good". If you have "good" in the language, you don't need "bad". You can say "ungood".'

	Winston smiled. It was safer not to say anything.

	Syme continued. 'Do you understand? The aim of Newspeak is to narrow thought. In the end we will make thoughtcrime impossible, because people won't have the words to think the crime. By the year 2050 there will be nobody alive who could even understand this conversation.'

	'Except . . .'Winston began and then stopped. He wanted to say, 'Except the proles'. But he was not sure if the Party would accept the thought.

	Syme had guessed what he was going to say. 'The proles are not really people,' he said. 'By 2050 - earlier, probably - you won't need a slogan like "freedom is slavery". The word "freedom" won't exist, so the whole idea of freedom won't exist either. The good Party member won't have ideas. If you're a good Party member, you won't need to think.'

	One of these days, thought Winston, Syme will be vaporized. He is too intelligent. He sees too clearly and speaks too openly. He goes to the Chestnut Tree Cafe, where the painters and musicians go and where Goldstein himself used to go. The Party does not like people like that. One day he will disappear. It is written in his face.

	Syme looked up. 'Here comes Parsons,' he said. You could hear his opinion of Parsons in his voice. He thought Parsons was a fool.

	Winston's neighbour from Victory Mansions was coming towards them. He was a fat, middle-sized man with fair hair and an ugly face. He looked like a little boy in a man's clothes. Winston imagined him wearing not his blue Party overalls but the uniform of the Spies.

	Parsons shouted 'Hello, hello' happily and sat down at the table. He smelled of sweat. Syme took a piece of paper from his pocket with a list of words on it and studied the words with an ink-pencil between his fingers.

	'Look at him, working in the lunch hour!' said Parsons. 'What have you got there, old boy? Something a bit too clever for me, I expect. Smith, old boy, I'll tell you why I'm chasing you. It's the money you forgot to give me.'

	'What money?' said Winston, feeling for money in his pocket. About a quarter of your earnings were paid back to the Party in different ways.

	'The money for Hate Week. You know I collect the money for Victory Mansions, and we're going to have the best flags around. Two dollars you promised me.'

	Winston found two dirty dollar notes and gave them to Parsons. Parsons wrote 'Two dollars' very carefully in small clear letters next to Winston's name in a little notebook. It was clear that he rarely read or wrote.

	'Oh, Smith, old boy,' he said. 'I hear that son of mine threw stones at you yesterday. I talked to him about it. He won't do it again, believe me.'

	'I think he was angry because he couldn't see the Eurasian prisoners hang,' said Winston.

	'Yes! Well, that shows what good children they are, doesn't it? Both of them. They only think about the Spies - and the war, of course. Do you know what my girl did last week? She was on a walk in the country with the Spies and she saw a strange man. She and two other girls followed him and then told the police about him.'

	'What did they do that for?' Winston asked, shocked.

	'They thought he was a Eurasian spy,' said Parsons. 'They noticed his shoes were different,' he added proudly.

	Winston looked at the dirty canteen, looked at all the ugly people in their ugly overalls, ate the terrible food and listened to the telescreen. A voice from the Ministry of Plenty was saying that they were all going to get more chocolate - twenty grammes a week. Was he the only one who remembered that last week they got thirty grammes? They were getting less chocolate, not more. But Parsons would not remember. And even a clever man like Syme found a way to believe it.

	Winston came out of his sad dream. The girl with dark hair, who he remembered from the Two Minutes Hate, was at the next table. She was looking at him, but when he looked back at her she looked away again. Winston was suddenly afraid. Why was she watching him? Was she following him? Perhaps she was not in the Thought Police, but Party members could be even more dangerous as spies. How had he looked when the telescreen voice told them about the chocolate? It was dangerous to look disbelieving. There was even a word for it in Newspeak: facecrime, it was called.

	The girl had turned her back to him again. At that moment the telescreen told them all to return to work and the three men jumped to their feet.



	CHAPTER FOUR

	Own life

	Winston sat at the table and opened his diary. He thought of his parents. He was, he thought, about ten or eleven years old when his mother disappeared. She was a tall, silent woman with lovely fair hair. He could not remember his father so well. He was dark and thin and always wore dark clothes. They had both been vaporized in the 1950s. His thoughts moved to other women and he started writing in the diary:

	It was three years ago. It was on a dark evening, in a narrow side-street near one of the big railway stations. She had a young face with thick make-up. I liked the make-up. The whiteness and the bright red lips. No woman in the Party wore make-up. There was nobody else in the street and no telescreens. She said two dollars. I...

	It was too difficult to continue. Winston wanted to hit his head against the wall, to kick the table over and throw the diary through the window - anything to stop the memory of that night.

	It was, of course, illegal to pay a woman for sex. But the punishment was about five years in a work camp, not death. The Party knew it happened. Some prole women sold themselves for a bottle of gin and the Party didn't worry much about that. The Party wanted to stop love and pleasure in sex, not sex itself. A request to marry would be refused if a man and a woman found each other attractive. Sex, to the Party, was only necessary to make children.

	He thought of Katherine, his wife. Winston had been married. He was probably still married; if his wife was dead, nobody had told him. They had lived together for about fifteen months, nine, ten, eleven years ago. Katherine was a tall, fair-haired girl who moved well. She had an interesting face, until you found out that there was almost nothing behind it. She believed everything the Party said. She had sex only because it was her duty to try and have children. When no children came, they agreed to separate.

	Every two or three years since then, Winston had found a prole woman who had agreed to have sex for money. But he wanted his own woman. He finished the story in his diary:

	When I saw her in the light she was quite an old woman. She had no teeth at all. But I had sex with her.

	He had written it down at last, but it did not help. He still wanted to shout and scream.

	***

	He had walked several kilometres. It was the second time in three weeks that he had missed an evening at the Party Members' Club. This was not a good idea; your attendance at the Club was carefully checked. A Party member had no free time and was never alone except in bed. It was dangerous to do anything alone, even go for a walk. There was a word for it in Newspeak: ownlife, it was called, meaning separation from everybody else.

	He was walking in a prole area near a building that had, in the past, been an important railway station. The houses were small and dirty and reminded him of rat-holes. There were hundreds of people in the streets: pretty young girls, young men chasing the girls, fat old women - the pretty girls in ten years time. Dirty children with no shoes ran through the mud.

	The people looked at him strangely. The blue overalls of the Party were an unusual sight in a street like this. It was unwise to be seen in such places, unless you had a definite reason to be there. The Thought Police would stop you if they saw you.

	Suddenly everybody was shouting and screaming and running back into their rat-hole houses. A man in a black suit ran past Winston and pointed at the sky.

	'Bomb,' he shouted. 'Up there! Bomb!'

	Winston threw himself to the ground. The proles were usually right when they warned you that a bomb was falling. When he stood up, he was covered with bits of glass from the nearest window. He continued walking. The bomb had destroyed a group of houses two hundred metres up the street and in front of him he saw a human hand, cut off at the wrist. He kicked it to the side of the road and turned right, away from the crowd.

	He was in a narrow street with a few dark little shops among the houses. He seemed to know the place. Of course! He was standing outside the shop where he had bought the diary. He was afraid, suddenly. He had been mad to buy the diary, and he had promised himself he would never come near this place again. But he noticed that the shop was still open, although it was nearly twenty-one hours. He would be safer inside than standing there doing nothing outside, so he went in. If anyone asked, he could say he was trying to buy a razor blade.

	The owner had just lit a hanging oil lamp which smelled unclean but friendly. He was a small, gentle-looking man of about sixty with a long nose and thick glasses. His hair was almost white but the rest of his face looked surprisingly young. He looked like a writer, or perhaps a musician. His voice was soft and he didn't speak like a prole.

	'I recognized you when you were outside,' he said immediately. 'You're the gentleman who bought the diary. There's beautiful paper in that diary. No paper like that has been made for - oh, I'd say fifty years.' He looked at Winston over the top of his glasses. 'Is there anything special I can do for you? Or did you just want to look round?'

	'I was... er... passing,' said Winston. 'And I just came in. I don't want to buy anything.'

	'Well, that's all right,' said the shop owner, 'because I haven't got much to sell you.' He looked round the shop sadly. 'Don't tell anyone I said so, but it's difficult to get old things these days. And when you can get them nobody wants them.' The old man's shop was full of things, but they were all cheap and dirty and useless. 'There's another room upstairs that you could look at,' he said.

	Winston followed the man upstairs. The room was a bedroom with furniture in it. There was a bed under the window, taking nearly a quarter of the room.

	'We lived here for thirty years until my wife died,' said the old man sadly. 'I'm selling the furniture, slowly. That's a beautiful bed, but perhaps it would be too big for you?'

	Winston thought he could probably rent the room for a few dollars a week, if he dared to. It would be so peaceful to live as people used to live in the past, with no voice talking to you, nobody watching you...

	'There's no telescreen' he said.

	'Ah!' said the old man. 'I never had one. Too expensive.'

	There was a picture on the wall. It showed a London church that used to be famous, in the days when churches were famous and people still went to them. Winston did not buy the picture, but he stayed in the room talking to the old man whose name, he discovered, was Charrington.

	Even when he left he was still thinking about renting the room. But then, as he stepped into the street, his heart turned to ice. A woman in blue overalls was walking towards him, not ten metres away. It was the girl with dark hair, the one in the Young People's League. The girl must be following him. Even if she was not in the Thought Police, she must be a spy.

	The Thought Police would come for him one night. They always came at night and they always caught you. And before they killed you, before you asked them on your knees to forgive you for your thoughtcrime, there would be a lot of pain.



	CHAPTER FIVE

	A Political Act

	Four days later he saw the girl with dark hair again. He was walking to the toilets at the Ministry of Truth and she was coming towards him. She had hurt her hand. She had probably hurt it on one of the story-writing machines - it was a common accident in that department.

	The girl was about four metres away when she fell forwards. As she fell, she hit her hand again and cried out in pain. Winston stopped. The girl got to her knees. Her face had turned a milky yellow colour, making her mouth look redder than ever. She looked at him and her face seemed to show more fear than pain.

	Winston felt a strange mix of emotions. In front of him was an enemy who was trying to kill him: in front of him, also, was a human being, in pain and perhaps with a broken bone. Already he had started to help her. He felt that her pain was in some strange way his own.

	'You're hurt?' he said.

	'It's nothing. My arm. It'll be all right in a second.'

	He helped her up.

	'It's nothing,' she repeated. 'Thanks, Comrade.'

	She walked away quickly. Winston was standing in front of a telescreen, so he did not show any surprise on his face, although it was difficult not to. As he had helped her up, she had put something in his hand.

	It was a piece of paper. He opened it carefully in his hand in the toilet, but did not try to read it. You could be certain the telescreens would be watching in the toilets. Back in his office, he put the piece of paper down on his desk among the other papers. A few minutes later he pulled it towards him, with the next job he had to do. On it, in large letters, was written:

	I love you.

	For the rest of the morning it was very difficult to work. At lunchtime in the canteen the fool Parsons, still smelling of sweat, did not stop talking to him about all the work he was doing for Hate Week.

	He saw the girl at the other end of the canteen, at a table with two other girls, but she did not look in his direction. In the afternoon he looked at the words I love you again and life seemed better. He believed her. He did not think she was in the Thought Police, not now. He wanted to see her again. How? How could he arrange a meeting?

	It was a week before he saw her again, in the canteen. He sat at her table and at that moment saw Ampleforth, the dreamy man with hairy ears who re-wrote poems. Ampleforth was walking around with his lunch, looking for a place to sit down. He would certainly sit with Winston if he saw him. Winston had about a minute to arrange something with the girl. He started to eat the watery soup they had been given for lunch.

	'What time do you leave work?' he said to the girl.

	'Eighteen-thirty'

	'Where can we meet?'

	'Victory Square, near the picture of Big Brother.'

	'It's full of telescreens.'

	'It doesn't matter if there's a crowd. But don't come near me until you see me among a lot of people. And don't look at me. Just follow me.'

	'What time?'

	'Nineteen hours.'

	'All right.'

	Ampleforth did not see Winston and sat down at another table. Winston and the girl did not speak again and they did not look at each another. The girl finished her lunch quickly and left, while Winston stayed to smoke a cigarette.

	He arrived at Victory Square early. Big Brother's picture looked up at the skies where he had beaten the Eurasian aeroplanes (or Eastasian aeroplanes - it had been a few years ago) in the Great Air War.

	Five minutes after the time they had arranged, Winston saw the girl near Big Brother's picture, but it was not safe to move closer to her yet; there were not enough people around. But suddenly some Eurasian prisoners were brought out and everyone started running across the park. Winston ran too, next to the girl, lost in the crowd.

	'Can you hear me?' she said.

	'Yes.'

	'Are you working this Sunday afternoon?'

	'No.'

	'Then listen carefully. Go ...'

	Like a general in the army she told him exactly where to go. A half-hour railway journey; turn left outside the station; two kilometres along the road; a gate; a path across a field. She seemed to have a map inside her head.

	'Can you remember all that?' she said, finally.

	'Yes. What time?'

	'About fifteen hours. You may have to wait. I'll get there by another way.'

	She moved away from him. But at the last moment, while the crowd was still around them, her hand touched his - though they did not dare look at each other.



	***



	Winston opened the gate and walked along the path across the field. The air was soft and the birds sang.

	You were not safer in the country than in London. There were no telescreens of course, but there were microphones and the Thought Police often waited at railway stations. But the girl was clearly experienced, which made him feel braver.

	He had no watch but it could not be fifteen hours yet, so he started to pick flowers. A hand fell lightly on his shoulder. He looked up. It was the girl, shaking her head as a warning to stay silent. She walked ahead of him and it was clear to Winston that she had been this way before. He followed, carrying his flowers, feeling that he was not good enough for her.

	They were in an open space of grass between tall trees when the girl stopped and turned. 'Here we are,' she said. He stood quite close to her but did not dare move nearer. 'I didn't want to say anything on the path because there might be microphones there. But we're all right here.'

	He still was not brave enough to go near her. 'We're all right here?' he repeated stupidly.

	'Yes, look at the trees.' They were small and thin. 'There's nothing big enough to hide a microphone in. And I've been here before.'

	He had managed to move closer to her now. She stood in front of him with a smile on her face. His flowers had fallen to the ground. He took her hand.

	'Until now I didn't even know what colour your eyes were,' he said. They were brown, light brown. 'And now you've seen what I'm really like, can you even look at me?'

	'Yes, easily.'

	'I'm thirty-nine years old. I've got a wife that I can't get rid of. I've got a bad knee. I've got five false teeth.'

	'I don't care,' said the girl.

	The next moment she was in his arms on the grass. But the truth was that although he felt proud, he also felt disbelief. He had no physical desire; it was too soon. Her beauty frightened him. Perhaps he was just used to living without women...

	The girl sat up and pulled a flower out of her hair. 'Don't worry, dear. There's no hurry. Isn't this a wonderful place? I found it when I got lost once on a walk in the country with the Young People's League. If anyone was coming, you could hear them a hundred metres away.'

	'What's your name?' asked Winston.

	'Julia. I know yours. It's Winston - Winston Smith. Tell me, dear, what did you think of me before I gave you the note?'

	He did not even think of lying to her. It was like an offer of love to tell her the truth. 'I hated the sight of you,' he said. 'If you really want to know, I thought you were in the Thought Police.'

	The girl laughed, clearly pleased that she had hidden her true feelings so well. She pulled out some chocolate from the pocket of her overalls, broke it in half and gave one of the pieces to Winston. It was very good chocolate.

	'Where did you get it?' he asked.

	'Oh, there are places,' she said. 'It's easier if you seem to be a good Party member like me. I'm good at games. I was a Group Leader in the Spies. I work three evenings a week for the Young People's League. I spend hours and hours putting up posters all over London. I do anything they want and I always look happy about it. It's the only way to be safe.'

	The taste of the excellent chocolate was still in Winston's mouth. 'You are very young,' he said. 'You're ten or fifteen years younger than I am. What did you find attractive in a man like me?'

	'It was something in your face. I thought I'd take a chance. I'm good at finding people who don't belong. When I first saw you I knew you were against them!

	When Julia said them she meant the Party, especially the Inner Party. She spoke about them with real hate, using bad words. Winston did not dislike that. It was part of her personal war against the Party.

	He kissed her softly and took her hands in his. 'Have you done this before?'

	'Of course. Hundreds of times - well, a lot of times.'

	'With Party members?'

	'Yes.'

	'With members of the Inner Party?'

	'Not with those pigs, no. But there are plenty that would if they got the chance. They're not as pure as they pretend to be.'

	His heart raced. He hoped that the Party was weakened by a lie. 'Listen. The more men you've had, the more I love you. Do you understand that?'

	'Yes, perfectly.'

	'You like doing this? I don't mean just me. I mean the thing itself?'

	'I love it.'

	That was what he wanted to hear. The need for sex, not the love of one person, would finish the Party. He pressed her down on the grass. This time there was no difficulty.

	Afterwards they fell asleep and slept for about half an hour. Their love, their sex together, had beaten the Party. It was a political act.



	CHAPTER SIX

	They Can't Get Inside You

	Winston looked round the little room above Mr Charrington's shop. As he had thought, Mr Charrington had been happy to rent it to him. He did not even mind that Winston wanted the room to meet his lover. Everyone, he had said, wanted a place where they could be alone and private occasionally.

	They had taken the room because during the month of May they had made love only one more time. ('It's safe to meet anywhere twice,' Julia had said). Then they had had to see each other in the street, in a different place every evening and never for more than half an hour at a time. The idea of having their own hiding place, indoors and near home, had been exciting for both of them.

	They were fools, Winston thought again. It was impossible to come here for more than a few weeks without being caught. But he needed her and he felt he deserved her.

	Julia was twenty-six years old. She lived in a Party building with thirty other girls ('Always the smell of women! I hate women!' she said) and she worked, as he had guessed, on the story-writing machines. She enjoyed her job, looking after a powerful electric motor. She was 'not clever' and 'did not much enjoy reading' but she liked machinery. Life, as she saw it, was quite simple. You wanted a good time, they (meaning the Party) wanted to stop you having it, so you broke the rules as well as you could.

	At that moment he heard her on the stairs outside and then she ran into the room. She was carrying a bag. She went down on her knees, took packets of food from the bag and put them on the floor. She had real sugar, real bread, real jam. All the good food that nobody had seen for years. And then...

	'This is the one I'm really proud of. I had to put paper round it because...'

	But she did not have to tell him why she had paper round it. The smell was already filling the room.

	'It's coffee,' he said softly. 'Real coffee.'

	'It's Inner Party coffee. There's a whole kilo here,' she said.

	'How did you get it?'

	'There's nothing those Inner Party pigs don't have. But of course waiters and servants steal things, and - look, I got a little packet of tea as well.'

	Winston opened the packet. 'It's real tea, not fruit leaves.'

	'Yes,' she said. 'But listen, dear. I want you to turn your back on me for three minutes. Go and sit on the other side of the bed. And don't turn round until I tell you.'

	Winston looked out of the window. He listened to a woman singing outside with deep feeling. Winston thought she would be quite happy if that June evening never ended. He had never heard a member of the Party sing like that.

	'You can turn round now' said Julia.

	He turned round and for a second almost did not recognize her. He thought she had taken her clothes off. But the change in her was more surprising than that. She had painted her face.

	He thought the make-up must be from a shop in the prole area. Her lips were red, her face was smooth; there was even something under her eyes to make them brighter. It was not well done, but Winston did not know that. He had never before seen a woman in the Party with make-up on. Julia looked prettier and much more like a woman.

	He took her in his arms.

	'Do you know what I'm going to do next?' she said. 'I'm going to get a real woman's dress from somewhere and wear it instead of these horrible overalls. In this room I'm going to be a woman, not a Party comrade.'

	After they made love they fell asleep, and when Winston woke up the hands on the clock showed nearly nine - twenty-one hours. He did not move because Julia was sleeping with her head on his arm. Most of her make-up was on the pillow or on him.

	They had never talked about marriage; it was impossible, even if Katherine died. Winston had told Julia about Katherine. She was goodthinkful, in Newspeak, unable to think a bad thought. She did not like sex. It was just...

	'Our duty to the Party.' Julia had said it for him. Just to have children. Children who would one day spy on their parents and tell the Party if they said or did anything wrong. In this way the family had become part of the Thought Police. Katherine had not told the Thought Police about Winston only because she was too stupid to understand his opinions.

	Winston had thought about killing Katherine and once nearly did. But now he and Julia were dead. When you disobeyed the Party you were dead.

	Julia woke up and put her hands over her eyes.

	'We are the dead,' Winston said.

	'We're not dead yet,' said Julia, pressing her body against his.

	'We may be together for another six months - a year. When they find us there will be nothing either of us can do for the other.'

	'We will tell them everything,' she said. 'Everybody always does. They make you feel so much pain.'

	'Even if we tell them everything, that's not a betrayal. The betrayal would only be if they made me stop loving you.'

	She thought about that. 'They can't do that,' she said finally. 'It's the one thing they can't do. They can make you say anything - anything - but they can't make you believe it. They can't get inside you.'

	'No,' he said, a little more hopefully. 'No, that's quite true. They can't get inside you.'

	'I'll get up and make some coffee,' she said. We've got an hour. What time do they turn the lights off at your flats?'

	'Twenty-three thirty.'

	'It's twenty-three hours at the Party building. But you have to get in earlier than that because...'

	She suddenly reached down from the bed to the floor, picked up a shoe and threw it hard into the corner of the room.

	'What was it?' he said in surprise.

	'A rat. I saw his horrible little nose. There's a hole down there. I frightened him, I think.'

	'Rats!' said Winston quietly. 'In this room!'

	'They're everywhere,' said Julia, without much interest, as she lay down again. 'We've even got them in the kitchen at the Party building. Did you know they attack children? In some parts of London a woman daren't leave a baby alone for two minutes. The big brown ones are the worst. They...'

	'Stop! Stop!' said Winston, his eyes tightly shut.

	'Dearest! You've gone quite pale. What's the matter?'

	'They are the most horrible things in the world - rats!'

	She put her arms round him but he did not re-open his eyes immediately.

	'I'm sorry,' he said. 'It's nothing. I don't like rats, that's all.'

	'Don't worry, dear. We won't have the dirty animals in here. I'll put something over the hole before we go.'

	Julia got out of bed, put on her overalls and made the coffee. The smell was so powerful and exciting that they shut the window, worried that somebody outside would notice it and ask questions. And they could taste the real sugar in the coffee - it was even better than the taste of the coffee itself.

	Julia walked round the room with one hand in her pocket and a piece of bread and jam in the other. She looked at the books without interest. She told Winston the best way to repair the table. She sat down in the old armchair to see if it was comfortable. She smiled at the old twelve-hour clock.

	'How old is that picture over there, do you think?' she asked. 'A hundred years old?'

	'More. Two hundred. But it's impossible to discover the age of anything these days.'

	She looked at it. 'What is this place?'

	'It's a church. Well, that's what it used to be.'

	When Winston got out of bed it was dark. The room was a world, a past world, and they were the last two people from it who were still living.



	CHAPTER SEVEN

	Our Leader, Emmanuel Goldstein

	They vaporized Syme. One morning he was not at work; a few careless people talked about his absence. On the next day nobody talked about him. His name disappeared from lists and newspapers. He did not exist. He had never existed.

	Parsons was helping to organize Hate Week. He was completely happy, running around painting posters, singing the new Hate Song, smelling even more strongly of sweat in the hot weather.

	Daily life no longer caused Winston pain: He had stopped drinking gin at all hours and his knee felt better. He did not want to shout angry words at the telescreen all the time.

	He met Julia four, five, six - seven times during the month of June. It was so hot at the end of the month that they lay on the bed in the room over Mr Charrington's shop without clothes on. The rat had never come back.

	Sometimes they talked about a more open war against the Party, but they did not know how to begin. Winston told her about the strange understanding that seemed to exist between himself and O'Brien. He sometimes felt like going to see him, telling him he was the enemy of the Party, demanding O'Brien's help. Strangely, Julia did not think this was a wild idea. She judged people by their faces and it seemed natural to her that the look in O'Brien's eyes made Winston believe in him. Also, she thought that everybody secretly hated the Party, although she did not believe in Goldstein and the Brotherhood; she thought the Party had invented them.

	And then at last it happened. All his life, it seemed to him, he had been waiting for this: there was a message from O'Brien.



	***



	Winston was outside his office at the Ministry when he heard a small cough behind him and turned. It was O'Brien.

	'I was reading your Newspeak article the other day. You know a lot about Newspeak, I believe.'

	'Oh, not really. I've never invented any of the words ...'

	'But you write it very well,' said O'Brien. 'That is not only my own opinion. I was talking recently to a friend of yours who knows a lot about Newspeak. I can't remember his name at the moment.'

	Winston's heart jumped. This could only mean Syme. But Syme was not only dead, he was vaporized, an unperson. It was dangerous to talk about an unperson; they could kill you for it. O'Brien was sharing a thoughtcrime with him.

	'In your Newspeak article you used two words which we have recently taken out of the language,' said O'Brien. 'Have you seen the new tenth edition?'

	'No,' said Winston. 'We still have the ninth in the office.'

	'The tenth will not be sent to offices for some months, but I have one. Would you like to see it, perhaps?'

	'Yes, very much,' said Winston, who could see where this was leading.

	'You will be interested, I'm sure. You will like the smaller number of verbs. Shall I send someone to you with the Dictionary? But I always forget that kind of thing. Perhaps you could collect it from my flat at a convenient time? Wait. Let me give you my address.'

	They were standing in front of a telescreen which could see what he was writing. He wrote an address in a notebook, pulled out the page and gave it to Winston.

	'I am usually at home in the evenings,' he said. 'If not, my servant will give you the Dictionary.'

	And then he was gone.



	***



	They had done it, they had done it at last!

	The room was long, carpeted and softly lit; the sound from the telescreen was low. At the far end of the room O'Brien was sitting under a lamp with papers on either side of him. He did not look up when the servant showed Winston and Julia in.

	Winston's heart was beating fast. It was dangerous to arrive with Julia, although they had met only outside O'Brien's flat. And although O'Brien had invited him, he was still afraid of the black-uniformed guards in this enormous building with its strange smells of good food and tobacco. But the guards had not ordered him out.

	O'Brien continued to work and did not look pleased at the visit. It seemed quite possible to Winston that he had just made a stupid mistake. He could not even pretend that he had come only to borrow the Dictionary - if he had, why was Julia here?

	O'Brien got up slowly from his chair and came towards them across the thick carpet. He pressed a switch on the wall and the voice from the telescreen stopped.

	Julia gave a small cry of surprise and without thinking Winston said, 'You can turn it off!'

	'Yes,' said O'Brien. 'We can turn it off. We in the Inner Party are allowed to do that.'

	Nobody spoke. Without the voice from the telescreen the room was completely silent. Then O'Brien smiled.

	'Shall I say it or will you?' he said.

	'I will say it,' said Winston immediately. 'That thing is really turned off?'

	'Yes. We are alone.'

	Winston paused. He did not know exactly what he expected from O'Brien. Then he continued, 'We believe that there is a secret organization working against the Party and that you are part of it. We want to join it and work for it. We are enemies of the Party. We are lovers, and we are thoughtcriminals. And now we are in your power.'

	O'Brien took a bottle and filled three glasses with dark red liquid. It reminded Winston of something he had seen a long time ago. Julia picked up her glass and smelled the liquid with great interest.

	'It is called wine,' said O'Brien with a small smile. 'Not much of it gets to ordinary Party members, I'm afraid.' His face became serious again, and he lifted his glass: 'To our Leader,' he said. 'To Emmanuel Goldstein.'

	Winston lifted his glass, wide-eyed. Wine was a thing he had read and dreamed about. For some reason he always thought it tasted sweet. But it tasted of nothing. The truth was that after years of drinking gin he could taste almost nothing.

	'So Goldstein is a real person?' he said.

	'Yes he is, and he is alive. Where, I do not know.'

	'And the Brotherhood is real, too? It was not invented by the Thought Police?'

	'No, it is real. But you will never learn much more about the Brotherhood than that.' He looked at his watch. 'It is unwise even for me to turn the telescreen off for more than half an hour. It was a mistake for both of you to arrive here together, and you, Comrade,' - he looked at Julia - 'will have to leave first. We have about twenty minutes. Now, what are you prepared to do?'

	'Anything that we can,' said Winston.

	O'Brien had turned himself a little in his chair so that he was looking at Winston. He seemed to think that Winston could answer for Julia.

	'You are willing to give your lives?'

	'Yes.'

	'You are willing to murder another person?'

	'Yes.'

	'You are willing to cause the death of hundreds of innocent people?'

	'Yes.'

	'If, for example, it would help us to blind a child and destroy its face - would you do that?'

	'Yes.'

	'Are you willing to kill yourselves, if we order you to do so?'

	'Yes.'

	'You are willing, the two of you, to separate and never see each other again?'

	'No!' shouted Julia.

	It seemed to Winston that a long time passed before he answered. 'No,' he said finally.

	'You did well to tell me,' said O'Brien. 'It is necessary for us to know everything.'

	O'Brien started walking up and down, one hand in the pocket of his black overalls, the other holding a cigarette.

	'You understand,' he said, 'that secrets will always be kept from you. You will receive orders and you will obey them without knowing why. Later I shall send you a book by Emmanuel Goldstein. When you have read the book you will be full members of the Brotherhood. When you are finally caught you will get no help. Sometimes we are able to get a razor blade into the prison to silence someone, but you are more likely to tell them all you know - although you will not know very much. We are the dead. We are fighting for a better life for people in the future.' He stopped and looked at his watch. 'It is almost time for you to leave, Comrade,' he said to Julia. 'Wait. There is still some wine.' He filled the glasses and held up his own glass. 'What shall we drink to? To the death of Big Brother? To the future?'

	'To the past,' said Winston.

	'Yes, the past is more important,' said O'Brien seriously.

	They finished the wine and a moment later Julia stood up to go. When she had left, Winston stood up and he and O'Brien shook hands. At the door he looked back, but O'Brien was already at his desk, doing his important work for the Party.



	CHAPTER EIGHT

	Doublethink

	On the sixth day of Hate Week, just before two thousand Eurasian prisoners were hanged in the park, the people of Oceania were told that they were not at war with Eurasia now. They were at war with Eastasia and Eurasia was a friend. You could hear it on the telescreens - Oceania was at war with Eastasia: Oceania had always been at war with Eastasia.

	Winston had worked more than ninety hours in the last five days of Hate Week. Now he had finished and he had nothing to do, no Party work until tomorrow morning. Slowly, in the afternoon sunshine, he walked up a narrow street to Mr Charrington's shop, watching for the Thought Police, but sure - although he had no reason to be sure - that he was safe. In his case, heavy against his legs, he carried the book, Goldstein's book. He had had it for six days but had not looked at it yet.

	Tired but not sleepy, he climbed the stairs above Mr Charrington's shop. He opened the window and put the water on for coffee. Julia would be here soon. He took Goldstein's book out of his case and opened it. Then he heard Julia coming up the stairs and jumped out of his chair to meet her. She put her brown tool bag on the floor and threw herself into his arms. It was more than a week since they had seen each other.

	'I've got the book', he said.

	'Oh, you've got it? Good,' she said without much interest, and almost immediately bent down to make the coffee.

	They did not talk about the book again until they had been in bed for half an hour. It was evening and just cool enough to have a blanket over them. Julia was falling asleep by his side. Winston picked the book up from the floor and sat up in bed.

	'We must read it,' he said. 'You too. All members of the Brotherhood have to read it.'

	'You read it,' she said with her eyes shut. 'Read it to me, that's the best way. Then you can explain it to me.'

	The clock's hands said six, meaning eighteen. They had three or four hours ahead of them. He put the book against his knee and began reading:

	There have always been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle and the Low. The world has changed but society always contains these three groups.

	'Julia, are you awake?' said Winston.

	'Yes, my love, I'm listening.'

	The aims of the three groups are completely different. The High want to stay where they are. The Middle want to change places with the High. Sometimes the Low have no aim at all, because they are too tired from endless boring work to have an aim. If they do have one, they want to live in a new world where all people are equal.

	At the beginning of the twentieth century this equality became possible for the first time because machines did so much of the work. A centuries-old dream seemed to becoming true. But in the early 1930s the High group saw the danger to them of equality for all and did everything possible to stop it.

	The individual suffered in ways that he had not suffered for centuries. Prisoners of war were sent into slavery or hanged. Thousands were sent to prison although they had broken no law. The populations of whole countries were forced to leave their homes. And all this was defended and even supported by people who said they believed in progress.

	The people who entered the new High group were from the professions: scientists, teachers, journalists. They used newspapers, radio, film and television to control people's thoughts. When a television that could both send and receive information was invented, private life came to an end. Every individual, or at least every important individual, could be watched twenty-four hours a day. For the first time it was possible to force people to obey the Party and to share the Party's opinion on all subjects.

	After the 1950s and 1960s the danger of equality had been ended and society had re-grouped itself, as always, into High, Middle and Low. But the new High group, for the first time, knew how to stay in that position for ever.

	First, in the middle years of the twentieth century, the Party made sure that it owned all the property- all the factories, land, houses, everything except really small pieces of personal property. This meant that a few people (the Inner Party) owned almost everything and the Middle and Low groups owned nearly nothing. There was therefore no hope of moving up in society by becoming richer and owning more.

	But the problem of staying in power is more complicated than that. In the past, High groups have fallen from power either because they have lost control of the Middle or Low groups or because they have become too weak, or because they have been attacked and beaten by an army from outside.

	After the middle of the century there was really no more danger from the Middle or Low groups. The Party had made itself stronger by killing all of its first leaders (people like Jones, Aaronson and Rutherford). By 1970 Big Brother was the only leader and Emmanuel Goldstein was in hiding somewhere.

	The Party then kept itself strong. The child of Inner Party parents is not born into the Inner Party; there is an examination, taken at the age of sixteen. Weak Inner Party members are moved down and clever Outer Party members are allowed to move up. Although proles do not usually move up into the Party, the Party always stops itself from becoming stupid or weak.

	The Party has also made attack from the outside impossible. There are now only three great countries in the world. They are always at war but none of them can win or even wishes to win these wars. Following the idea of 'doublethink' the mind of the Party, which controls us all, both knows and does not know the aim of these wars. The aim is to use everything that a country produces without making its people richer. If people became richer, there would be an end to the world of the High, the Middle and the Low. The Low and the Middle would not wish to stay in their places and would not need to.

	The Middle and Low are kept in their places by their belief in the wars that none of the three countries can win. So the Party has to end independent thought and make people believe everything they are told. The Party must know what every person is thinking, so they never want to end the war. War continues, always and for ever.

	People are given somewhere to live, something to wear and something to eat. That is all they need and they must never want more. They are given work, but only the Thought Police do their work really well.

	All good things in the world of Oceania today, all knowledge, all happiness, come from Big Brother. Nobody has ever seen Big Brother. He is a face on posters, a voice on the telescreen. We can be sure that he will never die. Big Brother is the way the Party shows itself to the people.

	Below Big Brother comes the Inner Party, which is now six million people, less than 2% of the population of Oceania. Below the Inner Party comes the Outer Party. The Inner Party is like the mind of the Party and the Outer Party is like its hands. Below that come the millions of people we call 'the proles', about 85% of the population.

	A Party member lives under the eye of the Thought Police from birth to death. Even when he is alone he can never be sure he is alone. He will never make a free choice in his life.

	But there is no law and there are no rules. They are not necessary. Most people know what they must do - in Newspeak they are 'goodthinkers'. And since Party members were children they have been trained in three more Newspeak words: 'crimestop', 'blackwhite' and 'doublethink'.

	Even young children are taught 'crimestop'. It means stopping before you think a wrong thought. When you are trained in 'crimestop' you cannot think a thought against the Party. You think only what the Party wants you to think.

	But the Party wants people to think different thoughts all the time. The important word here is 'blackwhite.' Like many Newspeak words, this has two meanings. Enemies say that black is white - they tell lies. But Party members say that black is white because the Party tells them to and because they believe it. They must forget that they ever had a different belief.

	'Blackwhite' and 'crimestop' are both part of 'doublethink'.

	'Doublethink' allows people to hold two different ideas in their minds at the same time - and to accept both of them. In this way they can live with a changing reality including a changing past. The past must be changed all the time because the Party can never make a mistake. That is the most important reason. It is also important that nobody can remember a time better than now and so become unhappy with the present. By using 'doublethink' the Party has been able to stop history, keep power and...

	'Julia?'

	No answer.

	'Julia, are you awake?'

	No answer. She was asleep. He shut the book, put it carefully on the floor, lay down and put the blanket over both of them. The book had not told him anything he did not already know, but after reading it he knew he was not mad. He shut his eyes. He was safe, everything was all right.

	When he woke he thought he had slept a long time but, looking at the old clock, he saw it was only twenty-thirty. Outside he could hear singing. It was a song written in the Ministry of Truth and a prole woman was singing it. If there was hope, thought Winston, it was because of the proles. Even without reading the end of Goldstein's book, he knew that was his message. The future belonged to the proles; Party members were the dead.

	'We are the dead,' he said.

	'We are the dead,' agreed Julia.

	'You are the dead,' said a voice behind them.

	They jumped away from each other. Winston felt his blood go cold. Julia's face had turned a milky yellow.

	'You are the dead,' repeated the voice.

	'It was behind the picture,' breathed Julia.

	'It was behind the picture,' said the voice. 'Stay exactly where you are. Do not move until we order you to.'

	It was starting, it was starting at last! They could do nothing except look into each other's eyes. They did not even think of running for their lives or getting out of the house before it was too late. It was unthinkable to disobey the voice from the wall.

	There was a crash of breaking glass. The picture had fallen to the floor. There was a telescreen behind it.

	'Now they can see us,' said Julia.

	'Now we can see you,' said the voice. 'Stand in the middle of the room. Stand back to back. Put your hands behind your heads. Do not touch each other.'

	'I suppose we should say goodbye,' said Julia.

	'You should say goodbye,' said the voice.

	There was a crash as a ladder broke through the window. Soldiers came in; more came crashing in through the door.

	Winston did not move, not even his eyes. Only one thing mattered: don't give them an excuse to hit you.

	One of the soldiers hit Julia hard in the stomach. She fell to the floor, fighting to breathe. Then two of them picked her up and carried her out of the room, holding her by the knees and shoulders. Winston saw her face, yellow with pain, with her eyes tightly shut as they took her away from him.

	He did not move. No one had hit him yet. He wondered if they had got Mr Charrington. He wanted to go to the toilet. The clock said nine, meaning twenty-one hours, but the light seemed too strong for evening. Was it really nine in the morning? Had he and Julia slept all that time?

	Mr Charrington came into the room and Winston suddenly realized whose voice he had heard on the telescreen. Mr Charrington still had his old jacket on, but his hair, which had been almost white, was now black. His body was straighter and looked bigger. His face was the clear-thinking, cold face of a man of about thirty-five. Winston realized that for the first time in his life he was looking at a member of the Thought Police.



	CHAPTER NINE

	Miniluv

	He did not know where he was. He thought he was in the Ministry of Love, Miniluv, but he could not be certain.

	He was in a high-ceilinged, windowless cell with white stone walls. It was bright with cold light. In this place, he felt, the lights would never be turned out. One moment he felt certain that it was bright day outside and the next moment he was equally certain that it was black night. 'We shall meet in the place where there is no dark,' O'Brien had said to him. In the Ministry of Love there were no windows.

	He thought of O'Brien more often than Julia. He loved Julia and would not betray her, but he did not think about what was happening to her. Sometimes he thought about what they would do to him. He saw himself on the floor, screaming through broken teeth for them to stop hitting him. O'Brien must know he was here. O'Brien said the Brotherhood never tried to save its members. But they would send him a razor blade if they could. One cut and it would all be finished.

	In his cell, there was a continuous noise from the machine that brought air in from outside. A narrow shelf went round the wall, stopping only at the door, and at the end opposite the door there was a toilet with no wooden seat. There were four telescreens, one in each wall.

	He was hungry. It might be twenty-four hours since he had eaten, it might be thirty-six. He still did not know, probably never would know, if it had been morning or evening when the soldiers took him. Since then he had been given no food.

	He sat on the narrow shelf without moving, with his hands crossed on his knees. He had already learned not to move too much. If you moved around they shouted at you from the telescreen. But he wanted food so badly, especially a piece of bread. He thought perhaps there was a small piece in the pocket of his overalls. His need for the bread grew stronger than the fear; he put a hand in his pocket.

	'Smith!' shouted a voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W! Hands out of pockets in the cells!'

	He crossed his hands on his knee again. There was a sound of marching boots outside. A young officer, black-uniformed, with an emotionless face, stepped into the cell. He waved to the guards behind him and they brought in a man who they were holding by the arms. It was Ampleforth, the man who re-wrote poems for the Party. The cell door closed behind him.

	Ampleforth walked up and down the cell. He had not yet noticed Winston. He was dirty, wore no shoes and had not shaved for several days. The hairy half-beard gave him a criminal look that was strange, with his large weak body and nervous movements.

	Winston thought quickly. He must speak to Ampleforth even if they shouted at him through the telescreen. It was possible that Ampleforth had the razor blade for him.

	'Ampleforth,' he said.

	There was no shout from the telescreen. Ampleforth stopped walking up and down. He seemed surprised. It took him a moment to recognize Winston.

	'Ah, Smith!' he said. 'You too!'

	'What are you in for?'

	Ampleforth put a hand to his head, trying to remember. 'There is something...' he said. 'We were working on a poem and I didn't change the word "God". It was necessary, in the poem. There was no other word. So I left it.' For a moment he looked happy, pleased with his work on the poem.

	'Do you know what time of day it is?' asked Winston.

	Ampleforth looked surprised. 'I hadn't thought about it. They took me - it could be two days ago - perhaps three.' He looked round the cell. 'There is no difference between night and day in this place. You can never know the time.'

	They talked for a few minutes, then, for no clear reason, a voice from the telescreen told them to be silent. Winston sat quietly, his hands crossed. Ampleforth was too large for the narrow shelf and moved from side to side. Time passed - twenty minutes, an hour. Again there was a sound of boots. Winston's stomach turned to water. Soon, very soon, perhaps now, the boots would come for him.

	The door opened. The cold-faced young officer stepped into the cell. He waved his arm at Ampleforth.

	'Room 101,' he said.

	Ampleforth marched out between the guards. He looked a little worried but did not seem to understand what was happening to him.

	More time passed. It seemed like a long time to Winston. He had only six thoughts: the pain in his stomach; a piece of bread; the blood and the screaming; O'Brien; Julia; the razor blade.

	Then his stomach turned to water again as he heard the boots outside. The door was opened and a smell of sweat came in with the cold air. Parsons walked into the cell.

	'You here!' Winston cried out in surprise.

	Parsons did not seem interested in Winston or surprised to see him. He looked completely without hope.

	'What are you in for?' said Winston.

	'Thoughtcrime' said Parsons, almost crying. 'They won't shoot me, will they? I mean, they don't shoot you when you haven't done anything - just thought? And they'll know everything I've done for the Party, won't they? I'll just get five years, don't you think? Or even ten years? Someone like me could really help the Party in prison. They wouldn't shoot me for just one mistake?'

	'Are you guilty?' said Winston.

	'Of course I'm guilty!' said Parsons, looking at the telescreen as he spoke. 'I wouldn't be here if I wasn't. Thoughtcrime is a terrible thing. Do you know how it happened? In my sleep! Yes, there I was working away for the Party - I never knew I had any bad stuff in my mind at all. And then I started talking in my sleep. Do you know what I said? I said "Down with Big Brother!" Do you know what I'm going to say to them? I'm going to say, "Thank you for saving me." '

	'Who told them about you?' said Winston.

	'My little daughter,' said Parsons, sad but proud. He walked up and down a few more times, looking hard at the toilet. 'Excuse me, old man,' he said. 'I can't help it. It's the waiting.'

	Parsons took his trousers down. Winston covered his face with his hands.

	'Smith!' shouted the voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W! Uncover your face. No faces covered in the cells.'

	Winston uncovered his face. Parsons used the toilet, loudly and horribly. The cell smelled terrible for hours afterwards.

	Parsons was taken out. More men and women were brought in and taken out again by the guards. One woman was sent to 'Room 101' and seemed to become smaller and change colour as she heard the words.

	'Comrade! Officer!' she cried. 'You don't have to take me to that place! Haven't I told you everything already? I'll say anything. Just write it down and I'll say it! Not Room 101.'

	'Room 101,' said the guard.

	A long time passed. Winston was alone and had been alone for hours. Sometimes he thought of O'Brien and the razor blade, but with less and less hope. He also thought, less clearly, of Julia. He thought that if she were in pain and he could double his own pain to help her, he would do it.

	He heard the boots again. O'Brien came in. Winston got to his feet. The shock made him forget the telescreen for the first time in years.

	'They've got you too!' he shouted out.

	'They got me a long time ago,' said O'Brien with a small smile. He stepped to one side. Behind him there was a large guard with a heavy stick in his hand.

	'You knew this, Winston,' said O'Brien. 'You have always known it.'

	Yes, he had always known it. But there was no time to think of that. The heavy stick in the guard's hand might hit him anywhere, on his head, ear, arm, elbow...

	The elbow! He had gone down on his knees, holding the pain in his elbow with the other hand. There was an explosion of yellow light. The pain was unbelievable, but the guard had only hit him once. They were both looking down at him and the guard was laughing.

	Well, one question was answered. You could never, for any reason on earth, wish for more pain. You only wished for one thing - that it would stop. Nothing in the world was as bad as physical pain. With pain there are no heroes, no heroes, he thought again and again as he lay screaming on the floor, holding his useless left arm.



	CHAPTER TEN

	Two and Two Make Five

	He was lying on a bed and he could not move. There was a strong light in his face. The damage to his elbow had only been the start of it. Five or six men in black uniforms had hit him with sticks or iron bars, kicked him with their boots...

	He could not remember how many times they had hit him or how long this punishment had lasted. Sometimes he told them what they wanted to know before they even touched him. Other times they hit him again and again before he said a word. And all this was just the start - the first stage of questioning that everyone in the cells of the Ministry of Love had to suffer.

	Later the questioners were not guards but Party men in suits who asked him questions for ten to twelve hours before they let him sleep. They made sure he was not comfortable and was in slight pain. They made a fool of him, made him cry.

	Sometimes they said they would call the guards and their sticks again. Other times they called him 'Comrade' and asked him in the name of Big Brother to say he was sorry.

	He told them he was responsible for every imaginable crime. He said he was an Eastasian spy. He said he had murdered his wife, although they knew very well she was still alive. He said he knew Goldstein...

	He did not remember when the questions had stopped. There was a time when everything was black and then he was in this room, lying on this bed, unable to move. O'Brien was looking down at him. His hand was on a machine.

	'I told you,' said O'Brien, 'that if we met again it would be here.'

	'Yes,' said Winston.

	O'Brien's hand touched a lever on the machine and a wave of pain passed through Winston's body.

	'That was forty,' said O'Brien. 'The numbers on the dial of this machine go up to a hundred. Please remember that I can make you feel a lot of pain at any time. If you lie, if you don't answer the question or even if you answer with less than your usual intelligence, you will feel pain. Do you understand that?'

	'Yes,' said Winston.

	'Do you remember,' O'Brien continued, 'writing in your diary, "Freedom is the freedom to say that two and two make four"?'

	'Yes,' said Winston.

	O'Brien held up his left hand, its back towards Winston, with the thumb hidden and four fingers pointing forward.

	'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?'

	'Four.'

	'And if the Party says that it is not four but five - then how many?'

	'Four.'

	The word ended in a shout of pain. The dial on the machine showed fifty-five. Winston could not stop himself from crying. O'Brien touched the lever, moving it just a little, and the pain grew slightly less.

	'How many fingers, Winston?'

	'Four.'

	O'Brien moved the lever and the dial showed sixty. 'How many fingers, Winston?'

	'Four! Four! What else can I say? Four!'

	The fingers swam in front of his eyes, unclear, but still four, four of them.

	'How many fingers, Winston?'

	'Four! Stop it, stop it! How can you continue? Four! Four!'

	'How many fingers, Winston?'

	'Five! Five! Five!'

	'No, Winston. That's no use. You are lying. You still think there are four. How many fingers, please?'

	'Four! Five! Four! Any thing you like. Only stop it, stop the pain!'

	Suddenly he was sitting up with O'Brien's arm round his shoulders. He felt very cold and shook uncontrollably. O'Brien held him like a baby and he felt much better. He felt that the pain was something that came from outside, and that O'Brien would save him from it.

	'You are a slow learner, Winston,' said O'Brien gently.

	'How can I help it?' cried Winston, through his tears. 'How can I help seeing what is in front of my eyes? Two and two are four.'

	'Sometimes, Winston. Sometimes they are five. Sometimes they are three. Sometimes they are all of them. You must try harder.'

	He put Winston back down on the bed. 'Again,' he said.

	The pain flamed through Winston's body. The dial was at seventy, then seventy-five. He had shut his eyes this time. He knew that the fingers were still there, and still four. He had to stay alive until the pain was over. He did not notice whether he was crying out or not. The pain grew less again. He opened his eyes.

	'How many fingers, Winston?'

	'Four. I would see five if l could. I am trying to see five.'

	'Which do you wish: to make me believe that you see five, or really to see them?'

	'Really to see them.'

	'Again,' said O'Brien.

	Perhaps the machine was at eighty - ninety. Winston could remember only now and again why the pain was happening. In front of his eyes a forest of fingers seemed to be moving in a kind of dance. He was trying to count them, he could not remember why. He knew only that it was impossible to count them and this was because four was in some strange way the same as five. He shut his eyes again.

	'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?'

	'I don't know. I don't know. You will kill me if you do that again. Four, five, six - I honestly don't know.'

	'Better,' said O'Brien.

	Winston wanted to reach out his hand and touch O'Brien's arm, but he could not move. The old feeling about him came back. It did not matter if O'Brien was a friend or an enemy. O'Brien was a person he could talk to. Perhaps people did not want to be loved as much as understood. O'Brien had caused him unbelievable pain and soon would probably kill him. It made no difference. They shared the same experiences; there was a place where they could meet and talk. O'Brien was looking down at him with a look that suggested he felt the same thing. When he spoke, it was like talking to a friend.

	'Do you know where you are, Winston?' he said.

	'I don't know. I can guess. In the Ministry of Love.'

	'Do you know how long you have been here?'

	'I don't know. Days, weeks, months - I think it is months.'

	'And why do you think we bring people to this place?'

	'To make them tell you about their crimes.'

	'No, that is not the reason.'

	'To punish them.'

	'No!' shouted O'Brien. His face and voice were angry. 'No! Not just to hear about your crimes. Not just to punish you. Shall I tell you why we have brought you here? To make you better. Your crimes do not interest us. Your actions do not interest us. We are interested in your thoughts. We do not destroy our enemies, we change them. We change their thoughts. Do you understand what I mean?'

	'Yes,' said Winston.

	A man in a white coat came into the room and put a heavy machine behind his head. O'Brien had sat down beside the bed so he could look into Winston's eyes.

	'This time it will not hurt,' said O'Brien. 'Keep looking at me.' Then he turned to the man in the white coat. 'Three thousand,' he said.

	Winston felt the machine against his head. He heard a lever pulled. Then it was like an explosion inside his head, though it was not certain if there was any noise. There was blinding light and the feeling that he had been thrown back on the bed where he already was. Something had happened inside his head. As he opened his eyes he remembered who he was, and where he was, and he recognized the face that was looking down into his own; but something was empty inside his head. It felt like a piece had been taken out of his brain.

	'Look me in the eyes,' said O'Brien. He held up the four fingers of his left hand with the thumb behind the hand. 'There are five fingers there. Do you see five fingers?'

	'Yes.' And he did see them, just for a second. O'Brien's words filled the hole in his mind with the complete truth.

	' You see now,' said O'Brien, 'that it is possible.'

	'Yes,' said Winston.

	O'Brien smiled. 'I enjoy talking to you,' he said. 'Your mind is like mine, except that you are mad. Before we finish you can ask me a few questions, if you want to.'

	'Any question I like?'

	'Anything.' He saw that Winston's eyes were on the machine. 'It is switched off. What is your first question?'

	'What have you done with Julia?' said Winston.

	O'Brien smiled again. 'She betrayed you, Winston. Immediately, completely. I have never seen anybody obey us so quickly. All her feelings against the Party have been burned out of her. She has changed herself completely.'

	'Did you use this machine?'

	O'Brien did not answer. 'Next question,' he said.

	'Does Big Brother exist?'

	'Of course he exists. The Party exists. Big Brother is the face of the Party.'

	'Does he exist in the same way that I exist?'

	'You do not exist,' said O'Brien.

	How could he not exist? But what use was it to say so? O'Brien would argue with him and win - again. 'I think I exist,' he said carefully. 'I was born and I will die. I have arms and legs. In that sense, does Big Brother exist?'

	'It is not important. But, yes, Big Brother exists.'

	'Will he ever die?'

	'Of course not. How could he die? Next question.'

	'Does the Brotherhood exist?'

	'That, Winston, you will never know. If we choose to free you and if you live to be ninety years old, you will never learn whether the answer to that question is Yes or No.'

	Winston lay silent. His chest moved up and down as he breathed. He still had not asked the first question that had come into his mind. He wanted to ask it but he could not move his tongue. O'Brien was smiling. He knows, thought Winston suddenly, he knows what I am going to ask. As he thought that, the words fell out of his mouth:

	'What is in Room 101?'

	O'Brien was still smiling. 'You know what is in Room 101, Winston. Everyone knows what is in Room 101.'



	CHAPTER ELEVEN

	The Last Man

	'There are three stages in returning you to society,' said O'Brien. 'There is learning, there is understanding and there is acceptance. It is time for you to begin the second stage.'

	As always, Winston was lying flat on his back. He was still tied to the bed, but these days he was not tied so tightly. The machine, too, was less frightening. He could stop them using it if he thought quickly enough. O'Brien pulled the lever only when he said something stupid.

	Winston could not remember how long this stage had lasted - weeks possibly - or how many times he had lain down on the bed, talking to O'Brien.

	'You have read the book, Goldstein's book, or parts of it,' said O'Brien. 'Did it tell you anything that you did not know already?'

	'You have read it?' said Winston.

	'I wrote it. I was one of the people who wrote it. No book is written by one person, as you know.'

	'Is any of it true?'

	'It describes our situation truthfully, yes. Its solutions make no sense at all. The proles will never attack the Party or even criticize it. Not in a thousand years or a million. They cannot. I do not have to tell you the reason: you know it already. The Party will rule for all time. Make that the starting point of your thoughts. Now, let us turn to the question of why we are ruling. What do you think?'

	Winston said what he thought O'Brien wanted to hear. 'You are ruling over us for our own good,' he said. 'You believe that people are not able to govern themselves and so...'

	He screamed. Pain had shot through his body. The machine showed thirty-five.

	'That was stupid, Winston, stupid!' said O'Brien. 'You should know better than to say a thing like that.' He switched the machine off and continued. 'Now I will tell you the answer to my question. The Party is only interested in power - not in the happiness of others, or money, or long life. We want power, only power, pure power. And we will never, never let it go. Now do you begin to understand me?'

	Winston thought how tired O'Brien looked. O'Brien moved forward in his chair, bringing his face close to Winston's.

	'You are thinking,' he said, 'that my face is old and tired. You are thinking that I talk of power but I cannot stop my own body getting old. Can you not understand, Winston, that each person is only a very small part of something much bigger? And when the small part needs changing, the whole grows stronger. Do you die when you cut your hair?'

	O'Brien turned away from the bed and began to walk up and down. 'You must understand that power belongs to the group, not to one person. An individual has power only when he belongs to a group so completely that he is not an individual any more. The Party says that "Freedom is Slavery" but the opposite is also true. Slavery is Freedom. Alone - free - a human being will die in the end. But it he can be completely part of the Party, not an individual, then he can do anything and he lives for all time. The second thing is that power means power over the human body but, above all, power over the human mind. We already control everything else.'

	For a moment Winston forgot about the machine. 'How can you say that you control everything? You can't control the weather. You don't even control the Earth. What about Eurasia and Eastasia? You don't control them.'

	'Unimportant. We shall control them when we want to. And if we did not, what difference would it make? Oceania is the world. Have you forgotten doublethink?'

	Winston lay back on the bed. He knew he was right. O'Brien was saying that nothing exists outside your own mind. There must be a way of showing this was wrong?

	O'Brien was smiling. 'The real power,' he said, 'is not power over things, but over men.' He paused and for a moment looked like a teacher talking to a clever schoolboy. 'How does one man show that he has power over another man, Winston?'

	Winston thought. 'By making him suffer,' he said.

	'Exactly. By making him suffer. Power means causing pain. Power lies in taking human minds to pieces and putting them together again in new shapes of your own choice. Do you begin to see, then, what kind of world we are making? It is the opposite of the stupid worlds which people used to imagine, worlds of love and pleasure. We have built a world of fear and suffering and hate. We shall destroy everything else - everything. We are destroying the love between child and parent, between man and man, and between man and woman. In the future there will be no wives and no friends. Children will be taken from their mothers when they are born. There will be no love, except the love of Big Brother. Nobody will laugh, except at an enemy they have destroyed. There will be no art, no literature, no science. If you want a picture of the future, Winston, imagine a boot stamping on a human face - for ever.'

	Winston could not say anything. His heart seemed frozen.

	O'Brien continued: 'You are beginning, I can see, to understand what that world will be like. But in the end you will do more than understand it. You will accept it, welcome it, become part of it.'

	Winston was still just strong enough to speak. 'You can't,' he said weakly.

	'What do you mean, Winston?'

	'If a society were built on hate, it would fall to pieces.'

	'No, no. You think that hating is more tiring than loving. Why should it be? And even if it was true, what difference would it make?'

	Winston was helpless again, unable to argue, unable to find the words to explain the horror that he felt. 'Something will beat you,' he said, finally. 'Life will beat you.'

	'We control life, Winston. And we control the way people are. People can be changed very easily, you know.'

	'No! I know that you will fail. There is something in all human beings that will beat you.'

	'And are you a human being, Winston? Are you a man?'

	'Yes.'

	'If you are a man, Winston, you are the last man. Your kind of man is finished. Do you understand that you are alone? Yon are outside history, you do not exist.' His voice changed as he gave Winston a hard look. 'And you think you are better than us, because we hate and cause pain?'

	'Yes, I think I am better.'

	O'Brien did not speak. Two other voices were speaking. After a moment Winston recognized one of the voices as his own. It was the conversation he had had with O'Brien on the night he had joined the Brotherhood. He heard himself promising to murder another person, to cause the death of hundreds of innocent people, to make a child blind and destroy its face. O'Brien pressed a switch and the voices stopped.

	'Get up from the bed,' he said.

	Winston got off the bed and stood up with difficulty.

	'You are the last man,' said O'Brien. 'Are you really better than us? You're going to see yourself as you are. Take off your clothes.'

	Winston took his dirty overalls off and saw himself in a three-sided mirror at the end of the room. He cried out at the horrible sight.

	'Move closer,' said O'Brien. 'Look at yourself closely in the three mirrors.'

	Winston had stopped walking towards the mirror because he was frightened. A bent, grey-coloured thing was walking towards him in the mirror. His face was completely changed. He had very little hair, his back was bent, he was terribly thin. This looked like the body of an old, dying man.

	'You have thought sometimes,' said O'Brien, 'that my face - the face of a member of the Inner Party - looks old and tired. What do you think of your own face?' He pulled out a handful of Winston's hair. 'Even your hair is coming out in handfuls. Open your mouth. Nine, ten, eleven teeth left. How many did you have when you came to us? And they are dropping out of your head. Look here!'

	He took hold of one of Winston's few front teeth between his thumb and two fingers. Pain filled Winston's face. O'Brien had pulled out the loose tooth. He threw it across the cell.

	'You are falling to pieces,' he said. 'You are dirty. Did you know you smell like a dog? What are you? Just a dirty animal. Now look into that mirror again. That is the last man.'

	Before he knew what he was doing, Winston had sat on a small chair near the mirror and started to cry. 'You did it!' he said, through his tears. 'You made me look like this.'

	O'Brien put a hand on his shoulder, almost kindly. 'No, Winston. You did it yourself when you stopped obeying the Party' He paused for a moment and then continued. 'We have beaten you, Winston. We have broken you. You have seen your body. Your mind is in the same state. There is nothing that we did not make you do.'

	Winston stopped crying. 'I have not betrayed Julia,' he said.

	O'Brien looked down at him thoughtfully. 'No,' he said. 'No, that is true. You have not betrayed Julia.'

	Winston thought again how intelligent O'Brien was. Nothing, it seemed, could stop him admiring the man. O'Brien had understood that Winston still loved Julia and that meant more than betraying the details of their meetings.

	'Tell me,' he said. 'How soon will they shoot me?'

	'It might be a long time,' said O'Brien. 'You are a difficult case. But don't give up hope. Everyone is cured sooner or later. In the end we shall shoot you.'



	CHAPTER TWELVE

	Room 101

	He was much better. He was getting fatter and stronger every day. The new cell was more comfortable than the others he had been in. There was a bed and a chair to sit on. There was paper and an ink-pencil. They had given him a bath and they let him wash frequently in a metal bowl. They even gave him warm water to wash with. They had given him new overalls, pulled out the rest of his teeth and given him new false teeth.

	Weeks had passed, perhaps months. He could count time passing by his meals; he received, he thought, three meals in twenty-four hours. The food was surprisingly good, with meat every third meal. Once there was even a packet of cigarettes.

	His mind grew more active. He sat down on his bed, his back against the wall, and began to re-train his mind. He belonged to them now, that was agreed. As he realized now, he had given in, he had been ready to belong to them, a long time before he had made the decision. From his first moment inside the Ministry of Love - and yes, even when he and Julia stood helpless in front of the telescreen in Charrington's room - he had understood that it had been stupid to fight against the power of the Party.

	He knew that for seven years the Thought Police had watched him, looking down on him like an insect walking along a path. They knew everything that he had said or done. They had played his voice back to him, shown him photographs. Some of them were photographs of Julia and himself. Yes, even... He could not fight against the Party now. And why should he? The Party was right.

	He began to write, with big child-like letters:

	FREEDOM IS SLAVERY

	TWO AND TWO MAKE FIVE

	And while he worked on crimestop inside his mind, he wondered when they would shoot him. They might keep him here for years, they might let him out for a short time - as they sometimes did. But one day they would shoot him. You never knew when. Often they shot you from behind, in the back of the head.

	One day - or one night perhaps - he had a dream. He was waiting for them to shoot him. He was out in the sunshine and he called out, 'Julia! Julia! My love! Julia!'

	He lay back on the bed, frightened. How many years had he added to his time in this cell by shouting out her name?

	There was the noise of boots outside. O'Brien walked into the cell. Behind him were the officer with the emotionless face and the black-uniformed guards.

	'You have had thoughts of betraying me,' he said. 'That was stupid. Tell me, Winston - and tell me the truth because I will know if you are lying - tell me, what do you really think of Big Brother?'

	'I hate him.'

	'You hate him. Good. Then the time has come for you to take the last step. You must love Big Brother.'

	He pushed Winston towards the guards. 'Room 101,' he said.

	Winston always knew if the cells were high up or low down in the building. The air was different. This place was many metres underground, as deep down as it was possible to go.

	It was bigger than most of the cells he had been in. There were two small tables in front of him. One was a metre or two away, the other was near the door. He was tied to a chair so tightly that he could not move, not even his head. He had to look straight in front of him.

	O'Brien came in. 'You asked me once,' he said, 'what was in Room 101. I said that you knew the answer already. Everyone knows it. In Room 101 there is the worst thing in the world.'

	The door opened again. A guard came in carrying a box. There was a tube at the front of it. He put it down on the table near the door.

	'The worst thing in the world,' said O'Brien, 'is different for each person. It may be death by fire, or by water, or fifty other deaths. Sometimes it is something quite small, that does not even kill you.'

	He had moved to one side and Winston could now see what was on the table. It was a big metal box and through holes in the sides he could see movement. Rats.

	'For you,' said O'Brien, 'the worst thing in the world is rats.'

	Winston had been afraid before, but suddenly he understood what the tube was for. He felt very, very sick.

	'You can't do that!' he screamed. 'O'Brien! What do you want me to do?'

	'Pain alone,' said O'Brien quietly, 'is not always enough. The rat,' he continued, like a teacher giving a lesson, 'eats meat. In the poor parts of the town a mother cannot leave her baby outside because in ten minutes there will only be bones left. Rats are also very intelligent. They know when a human being is helpless.'

	The rats were big and brown, they were making little high cries, fighting with each other. O'Brien moved the box until it was a metre from Winston's face.

	'You understand this box and tube? One end of the tube goes into the box and the other, wider end goes over your face. When I press this switch, a door into the tube will open and the rats will run along it towards your face. Sometimes they attack the eyes first. Sometimes they eat through the face, into the tongue.'

	One end of the tube was put over his face. He could see the first rat, its face, its teeth.

	He knew there was only one hope, one last hope. He needed to put someone else between himself and that rat. He needed to give them someone else. And he heard himself shouting, screaming, 'Do it to Julia! Do it to Julia! Not me! Julia! I don't care what you do to her. Destroy her face, leave only bones. Not me! Julia! Not me!'

	He heard O'Brien touch the switch and knew he had closed the door to the tube, not opened it.



	***



	The Chestnut Tree Cafe was almost empty. It was the lonely time of fifteen hours. Music came from the telescreens now but Winston was listening for news of the war. Oceania was at war with Eurasia. Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia. He drank a glass of gin, although it tasted terrible. A waiter brought him that day's Times.

	His finger moved on the table. He wrote in the dust:

	2 + 2= 5

	'They can't get inside you,' she had said. But they could get inside you. And when they did, something inside you died.

	He had seen her; he had even spoken to her. There was no danger in it. He knew that. They took no interest in him now. They could even see each other again if either of them wanted to. But they did not want to.

	He had met her by chance in the park on a cold day in March. She was fatter now. She had walked away from him at first. When he caught her, he put his arm round her waist but did not try to kiss her. He did not want to kiss her.

	They sat down on two iron chairs, not too close together. There were no telescreens here but possibly hidden microphones. It did not matter.

	'I betrayed you,' she said.

	'I betrayed you, too,' he said.

	'In the end they do something so terrible that you say "Don't do it to me, do it to somebody else, do it to the person I love." You only care about yourself.'

	'You only care about yourself,' he had agreed.

	And he had meant it. He had not just said it, he had wished it. He had wanted her at the end of the tube when they...

	Something changed on the telescreen in the Chestnut Tree Cafe. The music stopped and the face of Big Brother filled the telescreen. Winston looked up at the enormous face with the moustache. Tears ran down his face and he was happy. He had won the fight with himself. He loved Big Brother.





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





Project Gutenberg's The Boys' and Girls' Herodotus, by John S. White

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Boys' and Girls' Herodotus
       Being Parts of the History of Herodotus Edited for Boys and Girls

Author: John S. White

Release Date: October 16, 2017 [EBook #55758]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOYS' AND GIRLS' HERODOTUS ***




Produced by Turgut Dincer, Chris Pinfield and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)





Transcriber's Note.

Apparent typographical errors have been corrected. The inconsistent use
of hyphens has been retained, as has the use of both "king" and "King".

Small capitals have been replaced by full capitals, while italics are
indicated by _underscores_. A phrase in black letter font is indicated
by +plus signs+.

An advertisement for another work by the same author has been shifted to
the back of the book.

The illustration titled "ALPHABET" does not identify which alphabet it
is, but it appears to illustrate Egyptian hieroglyphics.

The "Synchronistical Table of the Principal Events in Herodotus" towards
the end of the book extends over two pages in small font: one on the
Greeks and one on the "Barbarians". The text on the Persian Empire is
spread over several columns on the second page. In this version the
table on each page has been split into two, and the text on the Persian
Empire placed at the end.




[Illustration: THE PYRAMIDS AND SPHINX.]




 THE
 BOYS' AND GIRLS'
 HERODOTUS

 BEING

 PARTS OF THE HISTORY OF HERODOTUS
 EDITED FOR BOYS AND GIRLS, WITH AN INTRODUCTION

 BY

 JOHN S. WHITE, LL.D.
 HEAD-MASTER, BERKELEY SCHOOL; EDITOR OF THE BOYS' AND GIRLS' PLUTARCH

 _WITH FIFTY ILLUSTRATIONS_

 NEW YORK & LONDON
 G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
 +The Knickerbocker Press+
 1884


 COPYRIGHT BY
 G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
 1884




INTRODUCTION.


Imagine yourself in the city of Athens near the close of the year 446
B.C. The proud city, after many years of supremacy over the whole of
Central Greece, has passed her zenith, and is surely on the decline. She
has never recovered from the blow received at Coronea. The year has been
one of gloom and foreboding. The coming spring will bring the end of the
five years' truce; and an invasion from the Peloponnesus is imminent.
But, as the centre of learning, refinement, and the arts, the lustre of
her fame is yet undimmed, and men of education throughout the world deem
their lives incomplete until they have sought and reached this
intellectual Mecca. During this year a stranger from Halicarnassus, in
Asia Minor, after many years of travel in Asia, Scythia, Libya, Egypt,
and Magna Grcia, has taken up his abode at Athens. He is still a young
man, hardly thirty-seven, yet his fame is that of the first and greatest
of historians. Dramatists and poets immortal there have been, but never
man has written such exquisite prose. Twenty centuries and more shall
wear away, and his history will be read in a hundred different tongues,
as well as in the beautiful and simple Greek that he wrote. His name
will grow into a household word; the school-boy will revel in his
delightful tales, and wise men will call him the Father of History! For
weeks the people of Athens have listened entranced to the public reading
of his great work, and now the Assembly has passed a decree tendering to
him the city's thanks, together with a most substantial gift in
recognition of his talentsa purse of money equal to twelve thousand
American dollars.

Such is the account which Eusebius gives, and others to whom we may
fairly accord belief; and it adds no slight tinge of romance to the
picture to discover among the listening throng the figure of the boy
Thucydides, moved to tears by the recital, who then and there received
the impulse that made of him also a great student and writer of history.
Herodotus, noticing how intensely his reading had affected the youth,
turned to Olorus, the father of Thucydides, who was standing near, and
said: "Olorus, thy son's soul yearns after knowledge."

Herodotus was born at Halicarnassus, 484 B.C., and died at Thurium in
Italy, about the year 425. As in the case of Plutarch, our knowledge of
his personal history is very meagre, aside from the little we glean from
his own writings. His parents, Lyxes and Rho, appear to have been of
high rank and consideration in Halicarnassus, and possessed of ample
means; and his acquaintance both at home and in Athens was of the best.
A lover of poetry and a poet by nature, the whole plan of his work, the
tone and character of his thoughts, and a multitude of words and
expressions, show him to have been perfectly familiar with the Homeric
writings. There is scarcely an author previous to his time with whose
works he does not appear to have been thoroughly acquainted. Hecatus,
to be sure, was almost the only writer of prose who had attained any
distinction, for prose composition was practically in its infancy; but
from him and from several others, too obscure even to be named, he
freely quotes, while the poets, Hesiod, Olen, Musus, Archilochus, the
authors of the "Cypria" and the "Epigoni," Alcus, Sappho, Solon, sop,
Aristeas, Simonides of Ceos, Phrynichus, schylus, and Pindar, are
referred to, or quoted, in such a way as to show an intimate
acquaintance with their works.

The design of Herodotus was to record the struggles between the Greeks
and barbarians, but, in carrying it out, as Wheeler, the English analyst
of the writings of Herodotus, has happily expressed it, he is
perpetually led to trace the causes of the great events of his history;
to recount the origin of that mighty contest between liberty and
despotism which marked the whole period; to describe the wondrous
manners and mysterious religions of nations, and the marvellous
geography and fabulous productions of the various countries, as each
appeared on the great arena; to tell to an inquisitive and credulous
people of cities vast as provinces and splendid as empires; of
stupendous walls, temples and pyramids; of dreams, omens, and warnings
from the dead; of obscure traditions and their exact accomplishment;and
thus to prepare their minds for the most wonderful story in the annals
of men, when all Asia united in one endless array to crush the states of
Greece; when armies bridged the seas and navies sailed through
mountains; when proud, stubborn-hearted men arose amid anxiety, terror,
confusion, and despair, and staked their lives and homes against the
overwhelming power of a foreign despot, till Heaven itself sympathized
with their struggles, and the winds and waves delivered their country,
and opened the way to victory and revenge.

The personal character of Herodotus, reflected from every page that he
wrote, renders his vivid story all the more happily suited to the
reading and study of boys and girls. He is as honest as the sun; equally
impartial to friends and foes; candid in the statement of both sides of
a question; and an artist withal in the gift of delineating a character
or a people with a few rapid strokes, so bold and masterly that the
sketch is placed before you with stereoscopic distinctness. For so early
a writer he presents a surprising unity of plan, combined with a variety
of detail that is amazing. What if he does crowd and enrich his story
with a world of anecdote? What if he feels bound always to paint for you
the customs, manners, dress, and peculiarities of a people before he
begins their history? This very biographical style is the charm of his
pen. Like the flowers of the magnolia-tree, his bright stories and vivid
descriptions at times almost overwhelm the root and branch of his
narrative; yet, after all, we remember the magnolia more because of its
cloud of snowy bloom in the few fleeting days of May than for all its
green and shade in the other months.

Herodotus, to be sure, lacks that far-seeing faculty of discerning
accurately the real causes of great movements, wars, and migrations of
mena faculty possessed pre-eminently by Thucydides and largely by
Xenophon, but he is equally far removed from the coldness of the one and
the ostentatious display of the other. He is above all things natural,
simple, and direct. "He writes," says Aristotle, "sentences which have a
continuous flow, and which end only when the sense is complete."

I have allowed Herodotus, as I did Plutarch, to tell you his story in
his own words, as closely as the English idiom can reproduce the spirit
and flow of the Greek, calling gratefully to my aid the labors of such
students, analysts, and translators of Herodotus as Rawlinson, Dahlmann,
Cary, and Wheeler; and I have discarded from the text only what is
indelicate to the modern ear, or what the young reader might find
tedious, redundant, or irrelevant to the main story. But so small a part
comes under this head, that I am sure I can fairly say to you: "This is
Herodotus himself." If you read him through and do not like him, who
will be the disappointed one? Not you, but I!

NEW YORK, _June 15, 1884_.




CONTENTS.


 CHAPTER.                                                           PAGE

 _BOOK I.CLIO._

   I. Origin of the War between the Greeks and Barbarians              1
  II. History of Lydia                                                 4
 III. Origin of Athens and Sparta                                     17
  IV. Conquest of Lydia by Cyrus                                      25
   V. History of the Medes to the Reign of Cyrus                      35
  VI. The Asiatic Greeks and the Lydian Revolt                        54
 VII. The Conquest of Assyria and the War with the Massaget          65


 _BOOK II.EUTERPE._

   I. Physical History of Egypt                                       83
  II. Religion, Manners, Customs, Dress, and Animals
       of the Egyptians                                               91
 III. God-Kings Prior to Menes                                       107
  IV. First Line of 330 Kings, only Three Mentioned                  108
   V. From Sesostris to Sethon                                       110
  VI. Third Line from the Twelve Kings to Amasis                     127


 _BOOK III.THALIA._

   I. Expeditions of Cambyses                                        138
  II. Usurpation of Smerdis the Magus and Accession of Darius        157
 III. Indians, Arabians, and Ethiopians                              169
  IV. Reign of Darius to the Taking of Babylon                       174


 _BOOK IV.MELPOMENE._

   I. Description of Scythia and the Neighboring Nations             188
  II. Invasion of Scythia by Darius                                  203
 III. Description of Libya                                           210


 _BOOK V.TERPSICHORE._

   I. Conquests of the Generals of Darius                            219
  II. The Ionian Revolt                                              229


 _BOOK VI.ERATO._

   I. The Suppression of the Ionian Revolt                           236
  II. Expedition of Mardonius                                        246
 III. Expedition of Datis and Artaphernes;
       The Battle of Marathon                                        252


 _BOOK VII.POLYMNIA._

   I. Death of Darius and Reign of Xerxes                            261
  II. Battle of Thermopyl                                           280


 _BOOK VIII.URANIA._

   I. The Invasion of Attica and the Battle of Salamis               292
  II. Xerxes' Retreat                                                302


 _BOOK IX.CALLIOPE._

   I. The War Continued; Battle of Plata and Siege of Thebes        307
  II. The Battle of Mycale                                           321
 Synchronistical Table of the Principal Events in Herodotus          326
 Herodotean Weights and Money, Dry and Liquid Measures,
  and Measurements of Lengths                                        328




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                    PAGE

 The Pyramids and Sphinx                                   _Frontispiece_
 Offering at the Temple of Delphi                                     14
 Athens from Mount Hymettus                                           19
 Assyrian Warriors in a Chariot                                       38
 Sphinx from S. W. Palace (Nimroud)                                   39
 Egyptian Hare                                                        47
 Winged Human-Headed Lion                                             69
 Sepulchral Vases                                                     80
 Map of gyptus                                                       82
 The Two Great Pyramids at the Time of the Inundation                 85
 Nile Boat                                                            89
 The Trochilus                                                        98
 Spearing the Crocodile                                               99
 Head of Rameses II.                                                 109
 Bust of Thothmes I.                                                 111
 Paris Carrying Away Helen                                           113
 Bes and Hi                                                          117
 The Great Pyramid, without the Surface Stone                        119
 Section of the Great Pyramid                                        121
 Section of Gallery in Pyramid                                       123
 Hall of Columns in the Great Temple of Karnak                       125
 Egyptian Bell Capitals                                              129
 Harpoon and Fish-Hooks                                              129
 Egyptian Helmets                                                    131
 The Great Sphinx                                                    135
 Egyptian Pottery                                                    139
 Sand Storm in the Desert                                            147
 Attack on Fort                                                      153
 The Obelisk                                                         155
 Mameluke Tomb, Cairo                                                163
 Egyptian War Chariot, Warrior, and Horse                            167
 Military Drum                                                       171
 Alphabet                                                            175
 Infantry Drilled by Sergeant                                        185
 Light-Armed Troops Marching                                         187
 Olive Trees                                                         217
 Head-Dress of a Riding Horse                                        221
 Amphitheatre at Pola                                                241
 Ruins of an Ancient Temple in Corinth                               249
 Tripolitza                                                          267
 The Tomb of Jonah, Konyunjik, and the Ruins Opposite Mosul          273
 Bridge over the Gortynius                                           277
 Cyclopean Walls at Cephalloma                                       281
 Island and Castle of Corfu                                          283
 Bridge at Corfu                                                     287
 Plains of Argos                                                     289
 Ancient Greek Walls Restored                                        293
 Celes Ridden by a Cupid                                             303
 Botia                                                              309
 Coat of Mail                                                        311
 The Fisherman                                                       313
 Juno                                                                315
 Elegant Vases and Amphor                                           317
 Bas-Relief of the Muses                                             325




HERODOTUS.




_BOOK I. CLIO._




CHAPTER I.

ORIGIN OF THE WAR BETWEEN THE GREEKS AND BARBARIANS.


This is a publication of the researches of Herodotus of Halicarnassus,
made in order that the actions of men may not be effaced by time, and
that the great and wondrous deeds displayed both by Greeks and
barbarians[1] may not be deprived of renown; and, furthermore, that the
cause for which they waged war upon each other may be known.

The learned among the Persians assert that the Phnicians were the
original authors of the quarrel; that they migrated from that which is
called the Red Sea to the Mediterranean and, having settled in the
country which they now inhabit, forthwith applied themselves to distant
voyages; and that they exported Egyptian and Assyrian merchandise,
touching at other places, and also at Argos. Argos, at that period,
surpassed in every respect all those states which are now comprehended
under the general appellation of Greece. They say, that on their arrival
at Argos, the Phnicians exposed their merchandise for sale, and that on
the fifth or sixth day after their arrival, when they had almost
disposed of their cargo, a great number of women came down to the
sea-shore, and among them Io the daughter of the king Inachus. While
these women were standing near the stern of the vessel, and were
bargaining for such things as most pleased them, the Phnicians made an
attack upon them. Most of the women escaped, but Io with some others was
seized. Then the traders hurried on board and set sail for Egypt. Thus
the Persians say that Io went to Egypt, and that this was the beginning
of wrongs. After this certain Greeks (for they are unable to tell their
name), having touched at Tyre in Phnicia, carried off the king's
daughter Europa. These must have been Cretans. Thus far they say that
they had only returned like for like, but that after this the Greeks
were guilty of the second provocation; for having sailed down in a
vessel of war to a, a city of Colchis on the river Phasis, when they
had accomplished the more immediate object of their expedition, they
carried off the king's daughter Medea; and the king of Colchis, having
despatched a herald to Greece, demanded satisfaction and the restitution
of the princess; but the Greeks replied, that as they of Asia had not
given satisfaction for the stealing of Io, they would not give any to
them. In the second generation after this, Alexander, the son of Priam,
having heard of these events, was desirous of obtaining a wife from
Greece by means of violence, being fully persuaded that he should not
have to give satisfaction, since the Greeks had not done so. When,
therefore, he had carried off Helen, the Greeks immediately sent
messengers to demand her back again and require satisfaction; but when
they brought forward these demands they were met with this reply: "You
who have not yourselves given satisfaction, nor made it when demanded,
now wish others to give it to you." After this the Greeks were greatly
to blame, for they levied war against Asia before the Asiatics did upon
Europe. Now, to carry off women by violence the Persians think is the
act of wicked men; to trouble one's self about avenging them when so
carried off is the act of foolish ones; and to pay no regard to them
when carried off, of wise men: for it is clear, that if they had not
been willing, they could not have been carried off. Accordingly the
Persians say, that they of Asia made no account of women that were
carried off; but that the Greeks for the sake of a Lacedmonian woman
assembled a mighty fleet, sailed to Asia, and overthrew the empire of
Priam. From this event they had always considered the Greeks as their
enemies: for the Persians claim Asia, and the barbarous nations that
inhabit it, as their own, and consider Europe and the people of Greece
as totally distinct.

Such is the Persian account; and to the capture of Troy they ascribe the
commencement of their enmity to the Greeks. As relates to Io, the
Phnicians do not agree with this account of the Persians but affirm
that she voluntarily sailed away with the traders. I, however, am not
going to inquire further as to facts; but having pointed out the person
whom I myself know to have been the first guilty of injustice toward the
Greeks, I will then proceed with my history, touching as well on the
small as the great estates of men: for of those that were formerly
powerful many have become weak, and some that were formerly weak became
powerful in my time. Knowing, therefore, the precarious nature of human
prosperity, I shall commemorate both alike.

Crsus was a Lydian by birth, son of Alyattes, and sovereign of the
nations on this side the river Halys. This river flowing from the south
between the Syrians[2] and Paphlagonians, empties itself northward into
the Euxine Sea. This Crsus was the first of the barbarians whom we know
of that subjected some of the Greeks to the payment of tribute, and
formed alliances with others. He subdued the Ionians and olians, and
those of the Dorians who had settled in Asia, and formed an alliance
with the Lacedmonians; but before his reign all the Greeks were free.




CHAPTER II.

HISTORY OF LYDIA.


The government, which formerly belonged to the Heraclid, passed to the
family of Crsus, who were called Mermnad. Candaules, whom the Greeks
call Myrsilus, was tyrant of Sardis, and a descendant of Alcus, son of
Hercules. For Agron, son of Ninus, grandson of Belus, great-grandson of
Alcus, was the first of the Heraclid who became king of Sardis; and
Candaules, son of Myrsus, was the last. They who ruled over this country
before Agron, were descendants of Lydus, son of Atys, from whom this
whole people, anciently called Monians, derived the name of Lydians.
The Heraclid, descended from a female slave of Jardanus and Hercules,
having been intrusted with the government by these princes, retained the
supreme power in obedience to the declaration of an oracle: they reigned
for twenty-two generations, a space of five hundred and five years, the
son succeeding to the father to the time of Candaules, son of Myrsus.
Candaules was murdered by his favorite, Gyges, who thus obtained the
kingdom, and was confirmed in it by the oracle at Delphi. For when the
Lydians resented the murder of Candaules, and were up in arms, the
partisans of Gyges and the other Lydians came to the following
agreement, that if the oracle should pronounce him king of the Lydians,
he should reign; if not, he should restore the power to the Heraclid.
The oracle answered that Gyges should become king. But the Pythian added
this, "that the Heraclid should be avenged on the fifth descendant of
Gyges." Of this prediction neither the Lydians nor their kings took any
notice until it was actually accomplished.

Thus the Mermnad deprived the Heraclid of the supreme power. Gyges
sent many offerings to Delphi; indeed most of the silver offerings at
Delphi are his; and besides the silver, he gave a vast quantity of gold;
among the rest six bowls of gold, which now stand in the treasury of the
Corinthians, and are thirty talents in weight; though, to tell the
truth, this treasury does not belong to the people of Corinth, but
Cypselus son of Eetion. Gyges was the first of the barbarians of whom we
know who made offerings at Delphi, except Midas, son of Gordius, the
king of Phrygia, who dedicated the royal throne, on which he used to sit
and administer justice, a piece of workmanship deserving of admiration.
The throne stands in the same place as the bowls of Gyges.

Periander the son of Cypselus was king of Corinth, and the Corinthians
say (and the Lesbians confirm their account) that a wonderful prodigy
occurred in his life-time. Arion of Methymna, second to none of his time
in accompanying the harp, and the first who composed, named, and
represented the dithyrambus at Corinth, was carried to Tnarus on the
back of a dolphin. Arion, having continued a long time with Periander,
made a voyage to Italy and Sicily, acquired great wealth there, and
determined to return to Corinth. He set out from Tarentum, and hired a
ship of some Corinthians, because he put more confidence in them than in
any other nation; but these men, when they were in the open sea,
conspired together to throw him overboard and seize his money. Learning
of this he offered them his money, and entreated them to spare his life.
But he could not prevail on them; the sailors ordered him either to kill
himself, that he might be buried ashore, or to leap immediately into the
sea. Arion, reduced to this strait, entreated them, since such was their
determination, to permit him to stand on the stern of the vessel in his
full dress and sing, and he promised when he had sung to make way with
himself. The seamen, pleased that they should hear the best singer in
the world, retired from the stern to the middle of the vessel. Arion put
on all his robes, took his harp in his hands, stood on the rowing
benches and went through the Orthian strain; the strain ended, he leaped
into the sea as he was, in full dress; the sailors continuing their
voyage to Corinth: but a dolphin caught him upon his back, and carried
him to Tnarus; so that, having landed, he proceeded to Corinth in his
full dress, and upon his arrival there, related all that happened.
Periander gave no credit to his relation, put Arion under close
confinement, and watched anxiously for the arrival of the seamen. When
they appeared, he summoned them and inquired if they could give any
account of Arion. They answered that he was safe in Italy, and that they
had left him flourishing at Tarentum. At that instant Arion appeared
before them just as he was when he leaped into the sea; at which they
were so astonished that, being fully convicted, they could no longer
deny the fact. These things are reported by the Corinthians and
Lesbians; and there is a little bronze statue of Arion at Tnarus,
representing a man sitting on a dolphin.

Alyattes the Lydian and father of Crsus, having waged a long war
against the Milesians, died after a reign of fifty-seven years. Once
upon recovery from an illness he dedicated at Delphi a large silver
bowl, with a saucer of iron inlaid; an object that deserves attention
above all the offerings at Delphi. It was made by Glaucus the Chian, who
first invented the art of inlaying iron.

At the death of Alyattes, Crsus, then thirty-five years of age,
succeeded to the kingdom. He attacked the Ephesians before any other
Greek people. The Ephesians being besieged by him, consecrated their
city to Diana, by fastening a rope from the temple to the wall. The
distance between the old town, which was then besieged, and the temple,
is seven stadia. Crsus afterward attacked the several cities of the
Ionians and olians in succession, alleging different pretences against
the various states. After he had reduced the Greeks in Asia to the
payment of tribute, he formed a design to build ships and attack the
Islanders. But when all things were ready for the building of ships,
Bias of Priene (or, as others say, Pittacus of Mitylene) arriving at
Sardis, put a stop to his ship-building by making this reply, when
Crsus inquired if he had any news from Greece: "O king, the Islanders
are enlisting a large body of cavalry, with the intention of making war
upon you and Sardis." Crsus, thinking he had spoken the truth, said:
"May the gods put such a thought into the Islanders, as to attack the
sons of the Lydians with horse." The other answering said: "Sire, you
appear to wish above all things to see the Islanders on horseback upon
the continent; and not without reason. But what can you imagine the
Islanders more earnestly desire, after having heard of your resolution
to build a fleet to attack them, than to catch the Lydians at sea, that
they may revenge on you the cause of those Greeks who dwell on the
continent, whom you hold in subjection?" Crsus, much pleased with the
conclusion, and convinced, (for he appeared to speak to the purpose,)
put a stop to the ship-building, and made an alliance with the Ionians
that inhabit the islands.

In course of time, when nearly all the nations that dwell within the
river Halys, except the Cilicians and Lycians, were subdued, and Crsus
had added them to the Lydians, all the wise men of that time, as each
had opportunity, came from Greece to Sardis, which had then attained to
the highest degree of prosperity; and amongst them Solon, an Athenian,
who made laws for the Athenians at their request, and absented himself
for ten years, sailing away under pretence of seeing the world, that he
might not be compelled to abrogate any of the laws he had established:
for the Athenians could not do it themselves, since they were bound by
solemn oaths to observe for ten years whatever laws Solon should enact
for them. On his arrival Solon was hospitably entertained by Crsus, and
on the third or fourth day, by order of the king, the attendants
conducted him round the treasury, and showed him all their grand and
costly contents. After he had seen and examined every thing
sufficiently, Crsus asked him this question: "My Athenian guest, the
great fame as well of your wisdom as of your travels has reached even to
us; I am therefore desirous of asking you who is the most happy man you
have seen?" He asked this question because he thought himself the most
happy of men. But Solon, speaking the truth freely, without any
flattery, answered, "Tellus, the Athenian." Crsus, astonished at his
answer, eagerly asked him: "On what account do you deem Tellus the
happiest?" He replied: "Tellus, in the first place, lived in a
well-governed commonwealth; had sons who were virtuous and good; and he
saw children born to them all, and all surviving. In the next place,
when he had lived as happily as the condition of human affairs will
permit, he ended his life in a most glorious manner. For coming to the
assistance of the Athenians in a battle with their neighbors of Eleusis,
he put the enemy to flight and died nobly. The Athenians buried him at
the public charge in the place where he fell, and honored him greatly."

When Solon had roused the attention of Crsus by relating many happy
circumstances concerning Tellus, Crsus, expecting at least to obtain
the second place, asked, whom he had seen next to him. "Cleobis," said
he, "and Biton, natives of Argos, for they possessed a sufficient
fortune, and had withal such strength of body, that they were both alike
victorious in the public games; and moreover the following story is
related of them:When the Argives were celebrating a festival of Juno,
it was necessary that their mother should be drawn to the temple in a
chariot; but the oxen did not come from the field in time, the young men
therefore put themselves beneath the yoke, and drew the car in which
their mother sat; and having conveyed it forty-five stades, they reached
the temple. After they had done this in sight of the assembled people, a
most happy termination was put to their lives; and in them the Deity
clearly showed that it is better for a man to die than to live. For the
men of Argos, who stood round, commended the strength of the youths, and
the women blessed her as the mother of such sons; but the mother
herself, transported with joy both on account of the action and its
renown, stood before the image and prayed that the goddess would grant
to Cleobis and Biton, her own sons, who had so highly honored her, the
greatest blessing man could receive. After this prayer, when they had
sacrificed and partaken of the feast, the youths fell asleep in the
temple itself, and never woke more, but met with such a termination of
life. Upon this the Argives, in commemoration of their filial affection,
caused their statues to be made and dedicated at Delphi."

Thus Solon adjudged the second place of felicity to these youths. Then
Crsus was enraged, and said: "My Athenian friend, is my happiness then
so slighted by you as worth nothing, that you do not think me of so much
value as private men?" He answered: "Crsus, do you inquire of me
concerning human affairsof me, who know that the divinity is always
jealous, and delights in confusion. For in lapse of time men are
constrained to see many things they would not willingly see, and to
suffer many things they would not willingly suffer. Now I put the term
of man's life at seventy years; these seventy years then give
twenty-five thousand two hundred days, without including the intercalary
months of the leap years, and if we add that month to every other year,
in order that the seasons arriving at the proper time may agree, the
intercalary months will be thirty-five more in the seventy years, and
the days of these months will be one thousand and fifty. Yet in all this
number of twenty-six thousand two hundred and fifty days, that compose
these seventy years, one day produces nothing exactly the same as
another. Thus, then, O Crsus, man is altogether the sport of fortune.
You appear to me to be master of immense treasures, and king of many
nations; but as relates to what you inquire of me, I cannot say, till I
hear that you have ended your life happily. For the richest of men is
not more happy than he that has a sufficiency for a day, unless good
fortune attend him to the grave, so that he ends his life in happiness.
Many men who abound in wealth are unhappy; and many who have only a
moderate competency are fortunate. He that abounds in wealth, and is yet
unhappy, surpasses the other only in two things; but the other surpasses
the wealthy and the miserable in many things. The former indeed is
better able to gratify desire and to bear the blow of adversity. But the
latter surpasses him in this; he is not indeed equally able to bear
misfortune or satisfy desire, but his good fortune wards off these
things from him; and he enjoys the full use of his limbs, he is free
from disease and misfortune, he is blessed with good children and a fine
form, and if, in addition to all these things, he shall end his life
well, he is the man you seek and may justly be called happy; but before
he die we ought to suspend our judgment, and not pronounce him happy,
but fortunate."

When Solon had spoken thus to Crsus, Crsus did not confer any favor on
him, but holding him in no account, dismissed him as a very ignorant
man, because he overlooked present prosperity, and bade men look to the
end of every thing.

After the departure of Solon, the indignation of the gods fell heavily
upon Crsus, probably because he thought himself the most happy of all
men. A dream soon after visited him while sleeping, which pointed out to
him the truth of the misfortunes that were about to befall him in the
person of one of his sons. For Crsus had two sons, of whom one was
grievously afflicted, for he was dumb; but the other, whose name was
Atys, far surpassed all the young men of his age. Now the dream
intimated to Crsus that he would lose this Atys by a wound inflicted
with the point of an iron weapon. When he awoke, and had considered the
matter with himself, he relieved Atys from the command of the Lydian
troops, and never after sent him out on that business; and causing all
spears, lances, and such other weapons as men use in war, to be removed
from the men's apartments, he had them laid up in private chambers, that
none of them being suspended might fall upon his son. While Crsus was
engaged with the nuptials of his son, a man oppressed by misfortune, and
whose hands were polluted, a Phrygian by birth, and of royal family,
arrived at Sardis. This man, having come to the palace of Crsus, sought
permission to obtain purification according to the custom of the
country. Crsus purified him, performing the usual ceremony, and then
inquired: "Stranger, who art thou, and from what part of Phrygia hast
thou come as a suppliant to my hearth? and what man or woman hast thou
slain?" The stranger answered: "I am the son of Gordius, and grandson of
Midas, and am called Adrastus. I unwittingly slew my own brother, and
being banished by my father and deprived of every thing, I have come
hither." Then said Crsus: "You were born of parents who are our
friends, and you have come to friends, among whom, if you will stay, you
shall want nothing; and by bearing your misfortune as lightly as
possible you will be the greatest gainer." So Adrastus took up his abode
in the palace of Crsus.

At this time a boar of enormous size appeared in Mysian Olympus, and
rushing down from that mountain, ravaged the fields of the Mysians. The
Mysians, though they often went out against him, could not hurt him, but
suffered much from him. At last deputies from the Mysians came to Crsus
and said: "O king, a boar of enormous size has appeared in our country,
and ravages our fields: though we have often endeavored to take him, we
cannot. We therefore earnestly beg, that you will send with us your son
and some chosen youths with dogs, that we may drive him from the
country." But Crsus, remembering the warning of his dream, answered:
"Make no further mention of my son; I shall not send him with you,
because he is lately married, but I will give you chosen Lydians, and
the whole hunting train, and will order them to assist you with their
best endeavors in driving the monster from your country." The Mysians
were content with this, but Atys, who had heard of their request, came
in, and earnestly protested: "Father, you used to permit me to signalize
myself in the two most noble and becoming exercises of war and hunting;
but now you keep me excluded from both, without having observed in me
either cowardice or want of spirit. How will men look on me when I go or
return from the forum? What kind of a man shall I appear to my
fellow-citizens? What to my newly married wife? Either let me then go to
this hunt, or convince me that it is better for me to do as you would
have me." "My son," said Crsus, "I act thus, not because I have seen
any cowardice, or any thing else unbecoming in you; but a vision in a
dream warned me that you would be short-lived, and would die by the
point of an iron weapon. It was on account of this that I hastened your
marriage, and now refuse to send you on this expedition; taking care to
preserve you, if by any means I can, as long as I live; for you are my
only son; the other, who is deprived of his hearing, I consider as
lost." The youth answered: "You are not to blame, my father, if after
such a dream you take so much care of me; but you say the dream
signified that I should die by the point of an iron weapon. What hand,
or what pointed iron weapon has a boar, to occasion such fears in you?
Had it said I should lose my life by a tusk, you might do as you have,
but it said by the point of a weapon; then since we have not to contend
against men, let me go." "You have outdone me," replied Crsus, "in
explaining the import of the dream, you shall go to the chase."

Then turning to the Phrygian Adrastus, he exclaimed: "Adrastus, I beg
you to be my son's guardian, when he goes to the chase, and take care
that no skulking villains show themselves in the way to do him harm.
Besides, you ought to go for your own sake, where you may signalize
yourself by your exploits; this was the glory of your ancestors, and you
are besides in full vigor." Adrastus answered: "On no other account, my
lord, would I take part in this enterprise; it is not fitting that one
in my unfortunate circumstances should join with his prosperous
compeers. But since you urge me, I ought to oblige you. Rest assured,
that your son, whom you bid me take care of, shall, as far as his
guardian is concerned, return to you uninjured."

Then all went away, well provided with chosen youths and dogs, and,
having arrived at Mount Olympus, they sought the wild beast, found him
and encircled him around. Among the rest, the stranger, Adrastus,
throwing his javelin at the boar, missed him, and struck the son of
Crsus; thus fulfilling the warning of the dream. Upon this, some one
ran off to tell Crsus what had happened, and having arrived at Sardis,
gave him an account of the action, and of his son's fate. Crsus,
exceedingly distressed by the death of his son, lamented it the more
bitterly, because he fell by the hand of one, whom he himself had
purified from blood; and vehemently deploring his misfortune, he invoked
Jove the Expiator, attesting what he had suffered by this stranger. He
invoked also the same deity, by the name of the god of hospitality and
private friendship: as the god of hospitality, because by receiving a
stranger into his house, he had unawares fostered the murderer of his
son; as the god of private friendship, because, having sent him as a
guardian, he found him his greatest enemy. Soon the Lydians approached,
bearing the corpse, and behind it followed the murderer. He, having
advanced in front of the body, delivered himself up to Crsus,
stretching out his hands and begging him to kill him upon it; for he
ought to live no longer. When Crsus heard this, though his own
affliction was so great, he pitied Adrastus, and said to him: "You have
made me full satisfaction by condemning yourself to die. You are not the
author of this misfortune, except as far as you were the involuntary
agent; but that god, whoever he was, that long since foreshowed what was
about to happen." Crsus buried his son as the dignity of his birth
required; but the son of Gordius, when all was silent around, judging
himself the most heavily afflicted of all men, killed himself on the
tomb.

Some time after, the overthrow of the kingdom of Astyages, son of
Cyaxares, by Cyrus, son of Cambyses, and the growing power of the
Persians, put an end to the grief of Crsus; and it entered into his
thoughts whether he could by any means check the growing power of the
Persians before they became formidable. After he had formed this
purpose, he determined to make trial as well of the oracles in Greece as
of that in Lydia; and sent different persons to different places, some
to Delphi, some to Ab of Phocis, and some to Dodona.

[Illustration: OFFERING AT THE TEMPLE OF DELPHI.]

He endeavored to propitiate the god at Delphi by magnificent sacrifices;
for he offered three thousand head of cattle of every kind fit for
sacrifice, and having heaped up a great pile, he burned on it beds of
gold and silver, vials of gold, and robes of purple and garments; hoping
by that means more completely to conciliate the god. When the sacrifice
was ended, having melted down a vast quantity of gold, he cast
half-bricks from it; of which the longest were six palms in length, the
shortest three, and in thickness one palm: their number was one hundred
and seventeen: four of these, of pure gold, weighed each two talents and
a half; the other half-bricks of pale gold, weighed two talents each. He
made also the figure of a lion of fine gold, weighing ten talents. This
lion, when the temple of Delphi was burned down, fell from the
half-bricks, for it had been placed on them; and it now lies in the
treasury of the Corinthians, weighing six talents and a half; for three
talents and a half were melted from it. Crsus, having finished these
things sent them to Delphi, and with them these following: two large
bowls, one of gold, the other of silver; that of gold was placed on the
right hand as you enter the temple, and that of silver on the left; but
these also were removed when the temple was burnt down; and the golden
one weighing eight talents and a half and twelve min, is placed in the
treasury of Clazomen; the silver one, containing six hundred amphor,
lies in a corner of the vestibule, and is used by the Delphians for
mixing the wine on the Theophanian festival. The Delphians say it was
the workmanship of Theodorus the Samian; and I think so too, for it
appears to be no common work. He also sent four casks of silver, which
stand in the treasury of the Corinthians; and he dedicated two lustral
vases, one of gold, the other of silver: on the golden one is an
inscription, OF THE LACEDMONIANS, who say that it was their offering,
but wrongfully, for it was given by Crsus: a certain Delphian made the
inscription, in order to please the Lacedmonians; I know his name, but
forbear to mention it. The boy, indeed, through whose hand the water
flows, is their gift; but neither of the lustral vases. At the same time
Crsus sent many other offerings without an inscription: amongst them
some round silver covers; and a statue of a woman in gold three cubits
high, which the Delphians say is the image of Crsus's baking woman; and
to all these things he added the necklaces and girdles of his wife.

These were the offerings he sent to Delphi; and to Amphiaraus, having
ascertained his virtue and sufferings, he dedicated a shield all of
gold, and a lance of solid gold, the shaft as well as the points being
of gold. These are now at Thebes in the temple of Ismenian Apollo.

To the Lydians appointed to convey these presents to the temples, Crsus
gave it in charge to inquire of the oracles, whether he should make war
on the Persians, and if he should invite any other nation as an ally.
Accordingly, when the Lydians arrived at the places to which they were
sent, and had dedicated the offerings, they consulted the oracles,
saying: "Crsus, king of the Lydians and of other Nations, esteeming
these to be the only oracles among men, sends these presents in
acknowledgment of your discoveries; and now asks whether he should lead
an army against the Persians, and whether he should join any auxiliary
forces with his own?" Such were their questions; and the opinions of
both oracles concurred, foretelling: "That if Crsus should make war on
the Persians, he would destroy a mighty empire;" and they advised him to
engage the most powerful of the Greeks in his alliance. When Crsus
heard the answers that were brought back, he was beyond measure
delighted with the oracles; and fully expecting that he should destroy
the kingdom of Cyrus, he again sent to Delphi, and having ascertained
the number of the inhabitants, presented each of them with two staters
of gold. In return for this, the Delphians gave Crsus and the Lydians
the right to consult the oracle before any others, and exemption from
tribute, and the first seats in the temple, and the privilege of being
made citizens of Delphi, to as many as should desire it in all future
time. Crsus, having made these presents to the Delphians, sent a third
time to consult the oracle. For after he had ascertained the veracity of
the oracle, he had frequent recourse to it. His demand now was whether
he should long enjoy the kingdom? to which the Pythian gave this answer:
"When a mule shall become king of the Medes, then, tender-footed Lydian,
flee over pebbly Hermus, nor tarry, nor blush to be a coward." With this
answer, when reported to him, Crsus was more than ever delighted,
thinking that a mule should never be king of the Medes instead of a man,
and consequently that neither he nor his posterity should ever be
deprived of the kingdom. In the next place he began to enquire carefully
who were the most powerful of the Greeks whom he might gain over as
allies; and on inquiry found that the Lacedmonians and Athenians
excelled the rest, the former being of Dorian, the latter of Ionic
descent: for these were in ancient time the most distinguished, the
latter being a Pelasgian, the other an Hellenic nation.




CHAPTER III.

ORIGIN OF ATHENS AND SPARTA.


What language the Pelasgians used I cannot with certainty affirm; but if
I may form a conjecture from those Pelasgians who now exist, and inhabit
the town of Crestona above the Tyrrhenians, and from those Pelasgians
settled at Placia and Scylace on the Hellespont, they spoke a barbarous
language. And if the whole Pelasgian body did so, the Attic race, being
Pelasgic, must at the time they changed into Hellenes have altered their
language. The Hellenic race, however, appears to have used the same
language from the time they became a people. At first insignificant, yet
from a small beginning they have increased to a multitude of nations,
chiefly by a union with many other barbarous nations. But the Pelasgic
race, being barbarous, never increased to any great extent.

Of these nations Crsus learnt that the Attic was oppressed and
distracted by Pisistratus, then reigning in Athens. When a quarrel
happened between those who dwelt on the sea-coast and the Athenians, the
former headed by Megacles, the latter by Lycurgus, Pisistratus aiming at
the sovereign power, formed a third party; and having assembled his
partisans under color of protecting those of the mountains, he contrived
this stratagem. He wounded himself and his mules, drove his chariot into
the public square, as if he had escaped from enemies that designed to
murder him in his way to the country, and besought the people to grant
him a guard, having before acquired renown in the expedition against
Megara, by taking its port, Nisa, and displaying other illustrious
deeds. The people of Athens, deceived by this, gave him such of the
citizens as he selected, who were not to be his javelin men, but
club-bearers, for they attended him with clubs of wood. These men,
joining in revolt with Pisistratus seized the Acropolis, and Pisistratus
assumed the government of the Athenians, neither disturbing the existing
magistracies, nor altering the laws; but he administered the government
according to the established institutions, liberally and well. Not long
after, the partisans of Megacles and Lycurgus became reconciled and
drove him out. In this manner Pisistratus first made himself master of
Athens, and, his power not being firmly rooted, lost it. But those who
expelled Pisistratus quarrelled anew with one another; and Megacles,
harassed by the sedition, sent a herald to Pisistratus to ask if he was
willing to marry his daughter, on condition of having the sovereignty.
Pisistratus having accepted the proposal and agreed to his terms, in
order to his restitution, they contrive the most ridiculous project
that, I think, was ever imagined; especially if we consider, that the
Greeks have from old been distinguished from the barbarians as being
more acute and free from all foolish simplicity, and more particularly
as they played this trick upon the Athenians, who are esteemed among the
wisest of the Greeks. In the Panean tribe was a woman named Phya, four
cubits high, wanting three fingers, and in other respects handsome; this
woman they dressed in a complete suit of armor, placed her on a chariot,
and having shown her beforehand how to assume the most becoming
demeanor, they drove her to the city, with heralds before, who, on their
arrival in the city, proclaimed what was ordered in these terms: "O
Athenians, receive with kind wishes Pisistratus whom Minerva herself
honoring above all men now conducts back to her own citadel." The report
was presently spread among the people that Minerva was bringing back
Pisistratus; and the people in the city believing this woman to be the
goddess, both adored a human being, and received Pisistratus.

[Illustration: ATHENS FROM MOUNT HYMETTUS.]

Pisistratus having recovered the sovereignty in the manner above
described, married the daughter of Megacles in accordance with his
agreement, but Pisistratus soon hearing of designs that were being
formed against him, withdrew entirely out of the country, and arriving
in Eretria, consulted with his sons. The opinion of Hippias prevailing,
to recover the kingdom, they immediately began to collect contributions
from those cities which felt any gratitude to them for benefits
received; and though many gave large sums, the Thebans surpassed the
rest in liberality. At length (not to give a detailed account) time
passed, and every thing was ready for their return, for Argive
mercenaries arrived from Peloponnesus; and a man of Naxos, named
Lygdamis, who had come as a volunteer, and brought both men and money,
showed great zeal in the cause. Setting out from Eretria, they came back
in the eleventh year of their exile, and first of all possessed
themselves of Marathon. While they lay encamped in this place, their
partisans from the city joined them, and others from the various
districts, to whom a tyranny was more welcome than liberty, crowded to
them. The Athenians of the city, on the other hand, had shown very
little concern all the time Pisistratus was collecting money, or even
when he took possession of Marathon. But when they heard that he was
marching from Marathon against the city, they at length went out to
resist him; and marched with their whole force against the invaders. In
the mean time Pisistratus's party, advanced towards the city, and
arrived in a body at the temple of the Pallenian Minerva, and there took
up their position. Here Amphilytus, a prophet of Acarnania, moved by
divine impulse, approached Pisistratus, and pronounced this oracle in
hexameter verse:

  "The cast is thrownthe net expanded wide
  At night the tunnies in the snare will glide."

He, inspired by the god, uttered this prophecy; and Pisistratus,
comprehending the oracle, and saying he accepted the omen, led on his
army. The Athenians of the city were then engaged at their breakfast,
and some of them after breakfast had betaken themselves to dice, others
to sleep; so that the army of Pisistratus, falling upon them by
surprise, soon put them to flight. As they were flying, Pisistratus
contrived a clever stratagem to prevent their rallying again, and forced
them thoroughly to disperse. He mounted his sons on horseback and sent
them forward. They, overtaking the fugitives, spoke as they were ordered
by Pisistratus, bidding them be of good cheer, and to depart every man
to his own home. The Athenians yielded a ready obedience, and thus
Pisistratus, having a third time possessed himself of Athens, secured
his power, more firmly, both by the aid of auxiliary forces, and by
revenues partly collected at home and partly drawn from the mines along
the river Strymon. He seized as hostages the sons of the Athenians who
had held out against him, and had not immediately fled, and settled them
at Naxos. He moreover purified the island of Delos, in obedience to an
oracle, and having dug up the dead bodies, as far as the prospect from
the temple reached, he removed them to another part of Delos.

Crsus was informed that such was, at that time, the condition of the
Athenians; and that the Lacedmonians, having extricated themselves out
of great difficulties, had gained the mastery over the Tegeans in war.
They had formerly been governed by the worst laws of all the people in
Greece, both as regarded their dealings with one another, and in holding
no intercourse with strangers. But they changed to a good government in
the following manner: Lycurgus, a man much esteemed by the Spartans,
having arrived at Delphi to consult the oracle, no sooner entered the
temple, than the Pythian spoke as follows:

  "Lycurgus, thou art come to my rich fane,
  Beloved by Zeus and all the heavenly train,
  But whether god or man I fear to say,
  Yet god thou must be more than mortal clay."

Some men say that, besides this, the Pythian also communicated to him
that form of government now established among the Spartans. But, as the
Lacedmonians themselves affirm, Lycurgus being appointed guardian to
his nephew Leobotis,[3] king of Sparta, brought those institutions from
Crete. For as soon as he had taken the guardianship, he altered all
their customs, and took care that no one should transgress them.
Afterwards he established military regulations, and instituted the
ephori and senators. Thus, having changed their laws, they established
good institutions in their stead. They erected a temple to Lycurgus
after his death, and held him in the highest reverence. As they had a
good soil and abundant population, they quickly sprang up and
flourished. And now they were no longer content to live in peace; but
proudly considering themselves superior to the Arcadians, they sent to
consult the oracle at Delphi, touching the conquest of the whole country
of the Arcadians; and the Pythian gave them this answer: "Dost thou ask
of me Arcadia? thou askest a great deal; I cannot grant it thee. There
are many acorn-eating men in Arcadia, who will hinder thee. But I do not
grudge thee all; I will give thee Tegea to dance on with beating of the
feet, and a fair plain to measure out by the rod." When the
Lacedmonians heard this answer reported, they laid aside their design
against all Arcadia; and relying on an equivocal oracle, led an army
against Tegea only, carrying fetters with them, as if they would surely
reduce the Tegeans to slavery. But being defeated in an engagement, as
many of them as were taken alive, were compelled to work, wearing the
fetters they had brought, and measuring the lands of the Tegeans with a
rod. Those fetters in which they were bound, were, even in my time,
preserved in Tegea, suspended around the temple of Alean Minerva.

In the first war, therefore, they had constantly fought against the
Tegeans with ill success, but in the time of Crsus, and during the
reign of Anaxandrides and Ariston at Lacedmon, they at length became
superior in the following manner: When they had always been worsted in
battle by the Tegeans, they sent to enquire of the oracle at Delphi,
what god they should propitiate, in order to become victorious over the
Tegeans. The Pythian answered, they should become so, when they had
brought back the bones of Orestes the son of Agamemnon. But as they were
unable to find the sepulchre of Orestes, they sent again to inquire of
the god in what spot Orestes lay interred, and the Pythian gave this
answer to the inquiries of those who came to consult her:

  "Down in Arcadia's level plain I know,
  Tegea lies:and where woe lies on woe
  Where two bound winds impatient of the yoke,
  Are forced to blowwhere stroke replies to stroke:
  Beneath the earth lies Agamemnon's son,
  Bear him to Sparta and Tegea's won."

When the Lacedmonians heard this, they were as far off the discovery as
ever, though they searched every where, till Lichas, one of the Spartans
who are called Agathoergi, found it. These Agathoergi consist of
citizens who are discharged from serving in the cavalry, such as are
senior, five in every year. It is their duty during the year in which
they are discharged from the cavalry, not to remain inactive, but go to
different places where they are sent by the Spartan commonwealth.
Lichas, who was one of these persons, discovered it in Tegea, both
meeting with good fortune and employing sagacity. For as the
Lacedmonians had at that time intercourse with the Tegeans, he, coming
to a smithy, looked attentively at the iron being forged, and was struck
with wonder when he saw what was done. The smith perceiving his
astonishment desisted from his work, and said: "O Laconian stranger, you
would certainly have been astonished had you seen what I saw, since you
are so surprised at the working of iron. For as I was endeavoring to
sink a well in this enclosure, in digging, I came to a coffin seven
cubits long; and because I did not believe that men were ever taller
than they now are, I opened it and saw that the body was equal to the
coffin in length, and after I had measured it I covered it up again."
The man told him what he had seen, and Lichas, reflecting on what was
said, conjectured from the words of the oracle, that this must be the
body of Orestes, forming his conjecture on the following reasons: seeing
the smith's two bellows he discerned in them the two winds, and in the
anvil and hammer the stroke answering to stroke, and in the iron that
was being forged the woe that lay on woe; representing it in this way,
that iron had been invented to the injury of man. He then returned to
Sparta, and gave the Lacedmonians an account of the whole matter; but
they brought a feigned charge against him and sent him into banishment.
He, going back to Tegea, related his misfortune to the smith, and wished
to hire the enclosure from him, but he would not let it. But in time,
when he had persuaded him, he took up his abode there; and having opened
the sepulchre and collected the bones, he carried them away with him to
Sparta. From that time, whenever they made trial of each other's
strength, the Lacedmonians were by far superior in war; and the greater
part of Peloponnesus had been already subdued by them.




CHAPTER IV.

CONQUEST OF LYDIA BY CYRUS.


Crsus being informed of all these things, sent ambassadors to Sparta,
with presents, and to request their alliance, having given them orders
what to say; and when they were arrived they spoke as follows: "Crsus,
king of the Lydians and of other nations, has sent us with this message:
'O Lacedmonians, since the deity has directed me by an oracle to unite
myself to a Grecian friend, therefore (for I am informed that you are
pre-eminent in Greece), I invite you in obedience to the oracle, being
desirous of becoming your friend and ally, without treachery or guile.'"
But the Lacedmonians, who had before heard of the answer given by the
oracle to Crsus, were gratified at the coming of the Lydians, and
exchanged pledges of friendship and alliance; and indeed certain favors
had been formerly conferred on them by Crsus; for when the
Lacedmonians sent to Sardis to purchase gold, wishing to use it in
erecting the statue of Apollo that now stands at Thornax in Laconia,
Crsus gave it as a present to them. For this reason, and because he had
selected them from all the Greeks, and desired their friendship, the
Lacedmonians accepted his offer of alliance; and in the first place
they promised to be ready at his summons; and in the next, having made a
great bronze bowl, capable of containing three hundred amphor, and
covered it outside to the rim with various figures, they sent it to him,
being desirous of making Crsus a present in return. But this bowl never
reached Sardis, for one of the two following reasons: the Lacedmonians
say, that when the bowl, on its way to Sardis, was off Samos, the
Samains having heard of it, sailed out in long ships, and took it away
by force. On the other hand the Samains affirm, that when the
Lacedmonians who were conveying the bowl found they were too late, and
heard that Sardis was taken and Crsus a prisoner, they sold the bowl in
Samos, and that some private persons, who bought it dedicated it in the
temple of Juno.

Crsus, mistaking the oracle, prepared to invade Cappadocia, hoping to
overthrow Cyrus and the power of the Persians. Whilst Crsus was
preparing for his expedition against the Persians, a Lydian named
Sandanis, who before that time was esteemed a wise man, and on this
occasion acquired a very great name in Lydia, gave him advice in these
words: "O king, you are preparing to make war against a people who wear
leather trousers, and the rest of their garments of leather; who inhabit
a barren country, and feed not on such things as they choose, but such
as they can get. Besides they do not habitually use wine, but drink
water; nor have they figs to eat, nor any thing that is good. In the
first place, then, if you should conquer, what will you take from them,
since they have nothing? On the other hand, if you should be conquered,
consider what good things you will lose. For when they have tasted of
our good things, they will become fond of them, nor will they be driven
from them. As for me, I thank the gods, that they have not put it into
the thoughts of the Persians to make war on the Lydians." Sandanis did
not, however, persuade Crsus, for he proceeded to invade Cappadocia, as
well from a desire of adding it to his own dominions, as a wish to
punish Cyrus on account of Astyages. For Cyrus, son of Cambyses, had
subjugated Astyages, son of Cyaxares, who was brother-in-law of Crsus,
and king of Medes.

Crsus, alleging this against him, sent to ask the oracle, if he should
make war on the Persians; and when an ambiguous answer came back, he,
interpreting it to his own advantage, led his army against the territory
of the Persians. When he arrived at the river Halys, Crsus transported
his forces, as I believe, by the bridges which are now there. But the
common opinion of the Greeks is, that Thales the Milesian procured him a
passage in the following way: Whilst Crsus was in doubt how his army
should pass over the river, for they say that these bridges were not at
that time in existence, Thales, who was in the camp, caused the stream,
which flowed along the left of the army, to flow on the right instead.
He contrived it thus: having begun above the camp, he dug a deep trench,
in the shape of a half-moon, so that the river, being turned into this
from its old channel, might pass in the rear of the camp pitched where
it then was, and afterward, having passed by the camp, might fall into
its former course; so that as soon as the river was divided into two
streams it became fordable in both. Some say, that the ancient channel
of the river was entirely dried up; but this I cannot assent to; for how
then could they have crossed it on their return?

However, Crsus, having passed the river with his army, came to a place
called Pteria, in Cappadocia. (Now Pteria is the strongest position of
the whole of this country, and is situated over against Sinope, a city
on the Euxine Sea.) Here he encamped and ravaged the lands of the
Syrians; and took the city of the Pterians, and enslaved the
inhabitants; he also took all the adjacent places, and expelled the
inhabitants, who had given him no cause for blame. But Cyrus, assembling
his own army, and taking with him all who inhabited the intermediate
country, went to meet Crsus. But before he began to advance, he sent
heralds to the Ionians, to persuade them to revolt from Crsus, which
the Ionians refused to do. When Cyrus had come up and encamped opposite
Crsus, they made trial of each other's strength on the plains of
Pteria; but when an obstinate battle took place, and many fell on both
sides, they at last parted, on the approach of night, neither having
been victorious.

Crsus laying the blame on his own army on account of the smallness of
its numbers, for his forces that engaged were far fewer than those of
Cyrus,marched back to Sardis, designing to summon the Egyptians
according to treaty, and to require the presence of the Lacedmonians at
a fixed time: having collected these together, and assembled his own
army, he purposed, when winter was over, to attack the Persians in the
beginning of the spring. With this design, when he reached Sardis, he
despatched ambassadors to his different allies, requiring them to meet
at Sardis before the end of five months; but the army that was with him,
and that had fought with the Persians, which was composed of mercenary
troops, he entirely disbanded, not imagining that Cyrus, who had come
off on such equal terms, would venture to advance upon Sardis. While
Crsus was forming these plans the whole suburbs were filled with
serpents, and when they appeared, the horses, forsaking their pastures,
came and devoured them. When Crsus beheld this, he considered it to be,
as it really was, a prodigy, and sent immediately to consult the
interpreters at Telmessus; but the messengers having arrived there, and
learnt from the Telmessians what the prodigy portended, were unable to
report it to Crsus, for before they sailed back to Sardis, Crsus had
been taken prisoner. The Telmessians had pronounced as follows: "that
Crsus must expect a foreign army to invade his country, which, on its
arrival, would subdue the natives, because, they said, the serpent is a
son of the earth, but the horse is an enemy and a stranger."

Cyrus, as soon as Crsus had retreated after the battle at Pteria,
having discovered that it was the intention of Crsus to disband his
army, saw that it would be to his advantage to march with all possible
expedition on Sardis, before the forces of the Lydians could be a second
time assembled. Whereupon Crsus, thrown into great perplexity, seeing
that matters had turned out contrary to his expectations, drew out the
Lydians to battle. At that time no nation in Asia was more valiant and
warlike than the Lydians. Their mode of fighting was from on horseback;
they were armed with long lances, and managed their horses with
admirable address.

The place where they met was the plain that lies before the city of
Sardis, which is extensive and bare; the Hyllus and several other rivers
flowing through it force a passage into the greatest, called the Hermus,
which, flowing from the sacred mountain of mother Cybele, falls into the
sea near the city of Phoca. Here Cyrus, when he saw the Lydians drawn
up in order of battle, alarmed at the cavalry, had recourse to the
following stratagem, on the suggestion of Harpagus, a Mede. Collecting
together all the camels that followed his army with provisions and
baggage, and causing their burdens to be taken off, he mounted men upon
them equipped in cavalry accoutrements, and ordered them to go in
advance of the rest of his army against the Lydian horse; his infantry
he bade follow the camels, and placed the whole of his cavalry behind
the infantry. When all were drawn up in order, he charged them not to
spare any of the Lydians, but to kill every one they met; but on no
account to kill Crsus, even if he should offer resistance when taken.
He drew up the camels in the front of the cavalry for this reason: a
horse is afraid of a camel, and cannot endure either to see its form or
to scent its smell; this then would render the cavalry useless to
Crsus, by which the Lydian expected to signalize himself. Accordingly,
when they joined battle, the horses no sooner smelt the camels and saw
them, than they wheeled round, and the hopes of Crsus were destroyed.
Nevertheless, the Lydians were not discouraged, but leaped from their
horses and engaged with the Persians on foot; but at last, when many had
fallen on both sides, the Lydians were put to flight, and being shut up
within the walls, were besieged by the Persians.

Sardis was taken in the following manner. On the fourteenth day after
Crsus had been besieged, Cyrus sent horsemen throughout his army, and
proclaimed that he would liberally reward the man who should first mount
the wall; upon this several attempts were made, and as often failed;
till, after the rest had desisted, a Mardian, whose name was Hyrades,
endeavored to climb up on that part of the citadel where no guard was
stationed, for on that side the citadel was precipitous and
impracticable. Hyrades had seen a Lydian the day before come down this
precipice for a helmet that had rolled down, and carry it up again. He
thereupon ascended the same way, followed by divers Persians; and when
great numbers had gone up, Sardis was thus taken, and the whole town
plundered.

The following incidents befel Crsus himself. He had a son of whom I
have before made mention, who was dumb. Now, in the time of his former
prosperity, Crsus had done every thing he could for him, and among
other expedients had sent to consult the oracle of Delphi concerning
him; but the Pythian gave him this answer:

  "O foolish king of Lydia, do not seek
  To hear thy son within thy palace speak!
  Better for thee that pleasure to forego
  The day he speaks will be a day of woe."

When the city was taken, one of the Persians, not knowing Crsus, was
about to kill him; Crsus, though he saw him approach, took no heed of
him, caring not if he should die by the blow; but this speechless son of
his, when he saw the Persian advancing against him, through dread and
anguish, burst into speech, and said: "Man, kill not Crsus." These were
the first words he ever uttered; but from that time he continued to
speak during the remainder of his life. So the Persians got possession
of Sardis, and made Crsus prisoner, after he had reigned fourteen
years, been besieged fourteen days, and lost his great empire, as the
oracle had predicted. The Persians, having taken him, conducted him to
Cyrus; and he, having heaped up a great pile, placed Crsus upon it,
bound with fetters, and with him fourteen young Lydians; designing
either to offer this sacrifice to some god, as the first fruits of his
victory, or wishing to perform a vow; or perhaps, having heard that
Crsus was a religious person, he placed him on the pile for the purpose
of discovering whether any deity would save him from being burned alive.
When Crsus stood upon the pile, notwithstanding the weight of his
misfortunes, the words of Solon recurred to him, as spoken by
inspiration of the deity, that "No living man could be justly called
happy." When this occurred to him, it is said, that after a long silence
he recovered himself, and uttering a groan, thrice pronounced the name
of Solon; when Cyrus heard him, he commanded his interpreters to ask
Crsus whom it was he called upon; Crsus for some time kept silence;
but at last, being constrained to speak, said: "I named a man, whose
discourses I more desire all tyrants might hear, than to be possessor of
the greatest riches." When he gave them this obscure answer, they again
inquired what he said, and were very importunate; he at length told them
that Solon, an Athenian, formerly visited him, and having viewed all his
treasures, made no account of them; telling, in a word, how every thing
had befallen him as Solon had warned him, though his discourse related
to all mankind as much as to himself, and especially to those who
imagine themselves happy. The pile now was kindled, and the outer parts
began to burn; when Cyrus, informed by the interpreters of what Crsus
had said, relented, considering that being but a man, he was yet going
to burn another man alive, who had been no way inferior to himself in
prosperity; and moreover, fearing retribution, and reflecting that
nothing human is constant, commanded the fire to be instantly
extinguished, and Crsus, with those who were about him, to be taken
down. But they with all their endeavors were unable to master the fire.
Crsus, perceiving that Cyrus had altered his resolution, when he saw
every man endeavoring to put out the fire, but unable to get the better
of it, shouted aloud, invoking Apollo, and besought him, if ever any of
his offerings had been agreeable to him, to protect and deliver him from
the present danger. And the Lydians relate, as he with tears invoked the
god, on a sudden clouds were seen gathering in the air, which before was
serene, and that a violent storm burst forth and vehement rain fell and
extinguished the flames; by which Cyrus perceiving that Crsus was
beloved by the gods, and a good man, when he had had him taken down from
the pile, asked him the following question: "Who persuaded you, Crsus,
to invade my territories, and to become my enemy instead of my friend?"
He answered: "O king, I have done this for your good but my own evil
fortune, and the god of the Greeks who encouraged me to make war is the
cause of all. For no man is so void of understanding as to prefer war
before peace; for in the latter children bury their fathers; in the
former, fathers bury their children. But, I suppose, it pleased the gods
that these things should be so."

Cyrus, having set him at liberty, placed him by his own side, and showed
him great respect. But Crsus, absorbed in thought remained silent; and
presently turning round and beholding the Persians sacking the city of
the Lydians, he said, "Does it become me, O king, to tell you what is
passing through my mind, or to keep silence?" Cyrus bade him say with
confidence whatever he wished; upon which Crsus asked him, "What is
this vast crowd so earnestly employed about?" He answered, "They are
sacking your city, and plundering your riches." "Not so," Crsus
replied, "they are neither sacking my city, nor plundering my riches,
for they are no longer mine; they are ravaging what belongs to you." The
reply of Crsus attracted the attention of Cyrus; he therefore ordered
all the rest to withdraw, and asked Crsus what he thought should be
done in the present conjuncture. He answered: "Since the gods have made
me your servant, I think it my duty to acquaint you, if I perceive
anything deserving of remark. The Persians, who are by nature
overbearing, are poor. If, therefore, you permit them to plunder and
possess great riches, you may expect the following results; whoso
acquires the greatest riches, be assured, will be ready to rebel.
Therefore, if you approve what I say, adopt the following plan: place
some of your body-guard as sentinels at every gate, with orders to take
the booty from all those who would go out, and to acquaint them that the
tenth must of necessity be consecrated to Jupiter; thus you will not
incur the odium of taking away their property; and they, acknowledging
your intention to be just, will readily obey." Cyrus was exceedingly
delighted at this suggestion, and ordered his guards to carry it out,
then turning to Crsus, he said: "Since you are resolved to display the
deeds and words of a true king, ask whatever boon you desire on the
instant." "Sir," he answered, "the most acceptable favor you can bestow
upon me is, to let me send my fetters to the god of the Greeks, whom I
have honored more than any other deity, and to ask him, if it be his
custom to deceive those who deserve well of him." Certain Lydians were
accordingly sent to Delphi, with orders to lay his fetters at the
entrance of the temple, and to ask the god, if he were not ashamed to
have encouraged Crsus by his oracles to make war on the Persians
assuring him that he would put an end to the power of Cyrus, of which
war such were the first-fruits (commanding them at these words to show
the fetters), and at the same time to ask if it were the custom of the
Grecian gods to be ungrateful. When the Lydians arrived at Delphi, and
had delivered their message, the Pythian is reported to have made this
answer: "The god himself even cannot avoid the decrees of fate; and
Crsus has atoned for the crime of Gyges his ancestor in the fifth
generation, who, being one of the body-guard of the Heraclid, murdered
his master, Candaules, and usurped his dignity, to which he had no
right. But although Apollo was desirous that the fall of Sardis might
happen in the time of the sons of Crsus, and not during his reign, yet
it was not in his power to avert the fates; but so far as they allowed
he accomplished, and conferred the boon on him; for he delayed the
capture of Sardis for the space of three years. Let Crsus know,
therefore, that he was taken prisoner three years later than the fates
had ordained; and in the next place, he came to his relief, when he was
upon the point of being burnt alive. Then, as to the prediction of the
oracle, Crsus has no right to complain; for Apollo foretold him that if
he made war on the Persians, he would subvert a great empire; and had he
desired to be truly informed, he ought to have sent again to inquire,
whether his own or that of Cyrus was meant. But since he neither
understood the oracle, nor inquired again, let him lay the blame on
himself. And when he last consulted the oracle, he did not understand
the answer concerning the mule; for Cyrus was that mule; inasmuch as he
was born of parents of different nations, the mother superior, but the
father inferior. For she was a Mede, and daughter of Astyages, king of
Media; but he was a Persian, subject to the Medes." When Crsus heard
this reply of the priestess of Apollo, he acknowledged the fault to be
his and not the god's.

The customs of the Lydians differ little from those of the Greeks. They
are the first of all nations we know of that introduced the art of
coining gold and silver; and they were the first retailers. The Lydians
themselves say that the games which are now common to themselves and the
Greeks, were invented by them during the reign of Atys, when a great
scarcity of corn pervaded all Lydia. For when they saw famine staring
them in the face they sought for remedies, and some devised one thing,
some another; and at that time the games of dice, knucklebones, ball,
and all other kinds of games except draughts, were invented, (for the
Lydians do not claim the invention of this ancient game,) and having
made these inventions to alleviate the famine, they employed them as
follows: they used to play one whole day that they might not be in want
of food; and on the next, they ate and abstained from play. Thus they
passed eighteen years; but when the evil did not abate, but on the
contrary, became still more virulent, their king divided the whole
people into two parts, and cast lots which should remain and which quit
the country, and over that part whose lot it should be to stay he
appointed himself king; and over that part which was to emigrate he
appointed his own son, whose name was Tyrrhenus. Those to whose lot it
fell to leave their country went down to Smyrna, built ships, and having
put all their movables which were of use on board, set sail in search of
food and land, till having passed by many nations, they reached the
Ombrici, where they built towns, and dwell to this day. From being
called Lydians, they changed their name to one after the king's son, who
led them out; from him they gave themselves the appellation of
Tyrrhenians.




CHAPTER V.

HISTORY OF THE MEDES TO THE REIGN OF CYRUS.


My history hence proceeds to inquire who Cyrus was that overthrew the
power of Crsus, and how the Persians became masters of Asia. In which
narration I shall follow those Persians, who do not wish to magnify the
actions of Cyrus, but to relate the plain truth; though I am aware that
there are three other ways of relating Cyrus's history. After the
Assyrians had ruled over Upper Asia five hundred and twenty years, the
Medes first began to revolt from them; and they it seems, in their
struggle with the Assyrians for liberty, proved themselves brave men;
and having shaken off the yoke, became free: afterward the other nations
also did the same as the Medes. When all throughout the continent were
independent, they were again reduced under a despotic government. There
was among the Medes a man famous for wisdom, named Deioces, son of
Phraortes. This Deioces, aiming at absolute power, had recourse to the
following plan. The Medes were at that time distributed into villages,
and Deioces, who was already highly esteemed in his own district,
applied himself with great zeal to the exercise of justice; and this he
did, since great lawlessness prevailed throughout the whole of Media,
and he knew that injustice and justice are ever at variance. The Medes
of the same village, observing his conduct, chose him for their judge;
and he, constantly keeping the sovereign power in view, showed himself
upright and just. By this conduct he acquired no slight praise from his
fellow citizens, so much so that the inhabitants of other villages,
hearing that Deioces was the only one who judged uprightly, having
before met with unjust sentences, when they heard of him gladly came
from all parts to Deioces, in order to submit their quarrels to his
decision; and at last they would commit the decision to no one else. In
the end, when the number of those who had recourse to him continually
increased as men heard of the justice of his decisions, Deioces, seeing
the whole devolved upon himself, would no longer occupy the seat where
he used to sit to determine differences, and refused to act as judge any
more, for it was of no advantage to him to neglect his own affairs, and
spend the day in deciding the quarrels of others. Upon this, rapine and
lawlessness growing far more frequent throughout the villages than
before, the Medes called an assembly and consulted together about the
present state of things, but, as I suspect, the partisans of Deioces
spoke to the following purpose: "Since it is impossible for us to
inhabit the country if we continue in our present condition, let us
constitute a king over us, and so the country will be governed by good
laws, and we ourselves shall be able to attend to our business, nor be
any longer driven from our homes by lawlessness." By some such words
they persuaded them to submit to a kingly government. Upon their
immediately putting the question, whom they should appoint king, Deioces
was unanimously preferred and commended: so that at last they agreed
that he should be their king. But he required them to build him a palace
suitable to the dignity of a king, and give him guards for security of
his person. The Medes accordingly did so: and built him a strong and
spacious palace in the part of the country that he selected, and
permitted him to choose guards for his person out of all the Medes.
Being thus possessed of the power, he compelled the Medes to build one
city, and having carefully adorned that, to pay less attention to the
others. As the Medes obeyed him in this also, he built lofty and strong
walls, which now go under the name of Ecbatana,[4] one placed in a
circle within the other; and this fortification was so contrived, that
each circle was raised above the other by the height of the battlements
only. The situation of the ground, rising by an easy ascent, was very
favorable to the design. There were seven circles altogether, the king's
palace and the treasury, situated within the innermost of them. The
largest of these walls was about equal in circumference to the city of
Athens; the battlements of the first circle were white, of the second
black, of the third purple, of the fourth blue, of the fifth bright red.
Thus the battlements of all circles were painted with different colors;
but the two last had their battlements plated, the one with silver, the
other with gold.[5]

Deioces then built these fortifications for himself, and round his own
palace; and he commanded the rest of the people to fix their habitations
round the fortification; and when all the buildings were completed he,
for the first time, established the following regulations: that no man
should be admitted to the king's presence, but every one should consult
him by means of messengers, and, moreover, that it should be accounted
indecency for any one to laugh or spit before him. He established such
ceremony about his own person, in order that those who were brought up
with him, and of no meaner family, nor inferior to him in manly
qualities, might not, when they saw him, grieve and conspire against
him; but that he might appear to be of a different nature to those who
did not see him. When he had established these regulations, and settled
himself in the tyranny, he was very severe in the distribution of
justice. And the parties contending were obliged to send him their case
in writing. All other things were regulated by him: so that, if he
received information that any man had injured another, he would send for
him, and punish him in proportion to his offence. For this purpose he
had spies and eaves-droppers in every part of his dominions.

Now Deioces collected the Medes into one nation, and ruled over it. The
following are the tribes of the Medes, the Bus, Parataceni, Struchates,
Arizanti, Budii, and the Magi. Deioces had a son, Phraortes, who, when
his father died, after a reign of fifty-three years, succeeded him in
the kingdom; but having so succeeded, he was not content to rule over
the Medes only, but made war on the Persians, and reduced them under the
dominion of the Medes. And afterward being master of these two nations,
both of them powerful, he subdued Asia, attacking one nation after
another; till at last he invaded the Assyrians, who inhabited the city
of Nineveh, and having made war on them, perished with the greater part
of his army, after he had reigned twenty-two years.

[Illustration: ASSYRIAN WARRIORS IN A CHARIOT.]

When Phraortes was dead, Cyaxares his son, grandson of Deioces,
succeeded him. He is said to have been more warlike than his ancestors.
He was the first to divide the people of Asia into cohorts, and then
into spearmen, archers, and cavalry; whereas before they had been
confusedly mixed together. It was he that fought with the Lydians, when
the day was turned into night, as they were fighting; and who subjected
the whole of Asia above the river Halys. He assembled the forces of all
his subjects, and marched against Nineveh to avenge his father, and
destroy that city. He took Nineveh (how they took it, I will relate in
another work),[6] and reduced the Assyrians into subjection, with the
exception of the Babylonian district. Having accomplished these things,
Cyaxares died, after a reign of forty years.

[Illustration: SPHINX FROM S. W. PALACE (NIMROUD).]

Astyages the son of Cyaxares succeeded him in the kingdom. He had a
daughter, to whom he gave the name of Mandane. When she arrived at a
marriageable age he gave her to no one of the Medes who was worthy of
her, but to a Persian, named Cambyses, whom he found descended of a good
family, and of a peaceful disposition, deeming him far superior to a
Mede of moderate rank. In the first year after Mandane was married to
Cambyses, Astyages saw a vision: it appeared to him that a vine sprang
from his daughter, and spread over all Asia. Having seen this and
communicated it to the interpreters of dreams, he sent to Persia for his
daughter, and her son the infant Cyrus, and upon her arrival he put her
under a guard, resolving to destroy her child, for the Magian
interpreters had signified to him from his vision, that the issue of his
daughter would reign in his stead. Astyages therefore, sent for
Harpagus, a kinsman of his, and the most faithful of all the Medes, and
the manager of all his affairs, and said to him: "Harpagus, on no
account fail to perform the business I now charge you with; nor expose
me to danger by deceiving me; nor, by preferring another, draw ruin upon
thy own head. Take the child of Mandane carry him to your own house and
kill him, and afterward bury him in whatever way you think fit."
Harpagus answered: "O king, you have never yet observed any ingratitude
in me, and I shall take care never to offend you for the future. If it
is your pleasure that this thing should be done, it is fitting that I
readily obey you." Harpagus, having given this answer, when the child
had been put into his hands, adorned as if for death, returned home
weeping; and upon his arrival he told his wife all that Astyages had
said. She asked him, "What then do you purpose to do?" He answered: "Not
as Astyages has commanded; though he should be yet more outrageous and
mad than he is, I will not comply with his wishes, nor will I submit to
him by performing such a murder: and for many reasons I will not murder
the child; both because he is my own relation, and because Astyages is
old, and has no male offspring; besides, if, after his death, the
sovereignty should devolve on his daughter, whose son he would now
murder by my means, what else remains for me but the greatest danger? It
is necessary, however, for my safety that the child should die, but as
necessary that one of Astyages' people should be the executioner, and
not one of mine." He accordingly sent a messenger for one of Astyages'
herdsmen, who he knew grazed his cattle on pastures most convenient for
the purpose, and on mountains abounding with wild beasts. His name was
Mitradates, and he had married his fellow-servant. The foot of the
mountains at which this herdsman grazed his cattle, lies to the north of
Ecbatana, toward the Euxine Sea. For the Medic territory on this side
toward the Saspires, is very mountainous, lofty, and covered with
forests; while all the rest of Media is level. When the herdsman,
summoned in great haste, arrived, Harpagus addressed him as follows:
"Astyages bids thee take this infant, and expose him on the bleakest
part of the mountains, that he may speedily perish; and has charged me
to add, that if thou by any means shouldst save the child, thou shalt
die by the most cruel death; and I am appointed to see the child
exposed." The herdsman, having heard these words, took the infant,
returned by the same way, and reached his cottage. It so happened that
an infant of his own lay dead at home. When he returned and came up to
his wife she asked him why Harpagus had sent for him in such haste.
"Wife," said he, "when I reached the city, I saw and heard what I wish I
had never seen, nor had ever befallen our masters. The whole house of
Harpagus was filled with lamentations; I, greatly alarmed, went in, and
as soon as I entered, I saw an infant lying before me, panting and
crying, dressed in gold and a robe of various colors. Harpagus bade me
to take up the child directly, and carry him away, and expose him in the
part of the mountain most frequented by wild beasts; telling me at the
same time, that it was Astyages who imposed this task on me, and
threatening the severest punishment if I should fail to do it. I took up
the infant and carried him away, supposing him to belong to one of the
servants; for I had then no suspicion whence he came; though I was
astonished at seeing him dressed in gold and fine apparel; and also at
the sorrow which evidently prevailed in the house of Harpagus. But soon
after, on my way home, I learnt the whole truth, from a servant who
accompanied me out of the city, and delivered the child into my hands;
that he was born of Mandane, Astyages' daughter, and of Cambyses son of
Cyrus, and that Astyages had commanded him to be put to death."

As the herdsman uttered these last words, he uncovered the child, and
showed it to his wife; she seeing that the child was large and of a
beautiful form, embraced the knees of her husband, and with tears
besought him by no means to expose it. He said that it was impossible to
do otherwise; for spies would come from Harpagus to see the thing done,
and he must himself die the most cruel death if he should fail to do it.
"Since, then" said she "I cannot persuade you not to expose the child,
do this: take our own dead child and expose it, and let us bring up the
son of Astyages' daughter as our own. Thus you will neither be convicted
of having wronged our masters, nor shall we have consulted ill for our
own interests; for the child that is dead will have a royal burial, and
the one that survives will not be deprived of life." The herdsman, happy
at the suggestion of his wife, gave to her the child that he had brought
for the purpose of putting to death, and his own, which was dead, he put
into the basket in which he had brought the other, and having dressed it
in all the finery of the other child, exposed it in the most desolate
part of the mountains. On the third day after the infant had been
exposed, the herdsman, having left one of his assistants as a guard,
went to the city, and arriving at the house of Harpagus, told him he was
ready to show the dead body of the infant. Harpagus accordingly sent
some of the most trusty of his guards, and by that means saw the body,
and buried the herdsman's child. The other, who afterwards had the name
of Cyrus, was brought up by the herdsman's wife, who gave him some other
name, and not that of Cyrus.

When the child attained the age of ten years, the following circumstance
discovered him. He was playing in the village in which the ox-stalls
were, with boys of his own age in the road. The boys had chosen this
reputed son of the herdsman for their king. He in sport appointed some
of them to build houses, and others to be his body-guards; one of them
to be the king's eye, and to another he gave the office of bringing
messages to him, assigning to each his proper duty. One of these boys
who was playing with him, son of Artembares, a man of rank among the
Medes, refused to obey the orders of Cyrus; he therefore commanded the
others to seize him, and when they obeyed, Cyrus scourged the boy very
severely. But the boy, as soon as he was let loose, considering that he
had been treated with great indignity, took it very much to heart, and
hastening to the city, complained to his father of the treatment he had
met with from the son of Astyages' herdsman. Artembares, in a transport
of anger, went immediately to Astyages, and taking his son with him,
said that he suffered treatment that was not to be borne, adding, "Thus,
O king, are we insulted by your slave, the son of a herdsman;" showing
the boy's shoulders. Astyages having heard and seen what was done,
resolving, on account of the rank of Artembares, to avenge the indignity
offered to the youth, sent for the herdsman and his son. When both came
into his presence, Astyages, looking upon Cyrus, said: "Have you, who
are the son of such a man as this, dared to treat the son of one of the
principal persons in my kingdom with such indignity?" But Cyrus
answered: "Sir, I treated him as I did with justice. For the boys of our
village, of whom he was one, in their play made me their king, because I
appeared to them the most fitted for that office. All the other boys
performed what they were ordered, but he refused to obey and paid no
attention to my commands, so he was punished: if I deserve punishment
for this here I am ready to submit to it." As the boy spoke Astyages
recognised him; the character of his face appeared like his own, and his
answer more free than accorded with his condition; the time also of the
exposure seemed to agree with the age of the boy. Alarmed at this
discovery, he was for some time speechless; and at last, having with
difficulty recovered himself (being desirous of sending Artembares away
in order that he might examine the herdsman in private), he said:
"Artembares, I will take care that neither you nor your son shall have
any cause of complaint," and dismissed him; but the servants, at the
command of Astyages, conducted Cyrus into an inner room; and when the
herdsman remained alone, he asked him in the absence of witnesses,
whence he had the boy, and from whose hands he received him? He affirmed
that the boy was his own son, and that the mother who bore him was still
living with him. Astyages told him, that he did not consult his own
safety in wishing to be put to the torture; and as he said this he made
a signal to his guards to seize him. The man, when brought to the
torture, discovered the whole matter, speaking the truth throughout; and
concluded with prayers and entreaties for pardon. Astyages, when the
herdsman had confessed the truth, did not concern himself much about him
afterwards; but attaching great blame to Harpagus, he ordered his guards
to summon him; and when Astyages asked, "Harpagus, by what kind of death
did you dispose of the child which I delivered to you, born of my
daughter?" Harpagus, seeing the herdsman present, had not recourse to
falsehood, lest he should be detected and convicted, but said, "O king,
when I had received the infant, I carefully considered how I could act
according to your wish and command, and, without offending you, I might
be free from the crime of murder both in your daughter's sight and in
yours. I therefore sent for this herdsman and gave him the child, saying
that you had commanded him to put it to death, and in saying this I did
not speak falsely, for such indeed were your orders. In this manner I
delivered the infant to him, charging him to place it in some desert
mountain, and to stay and watch till the child was dead, threatening the
severest punishment if he should not fully carry out these injunctions.
When he had executed these orders, and the child was dead, I sent some
of the most trusty of my servants, and by means of them beheld the body,
and buried it. This is the whole truth, O king, and such was the fate of
the child."

Thus Harpagus told the real truth; but Astyages, dissembling the anger
which he felt on account of what had been done, again related to
Harpagus the whole matter as he had heard it from the herdsman; and
afterwards, when he had repeated it throughout, he ended by saying that
the child was alive and all was well. "For," he added, "I suffered much
on account of what had been done regarding this child, and could not
easily bear the reproaches of my daughter; therefore, since fortune has
taken a more favorable turn, do you, in the first place, send your own
son to accompany the boy I have recovered; and, in the next place, (for
I propose to offer a sacrifice for the preservation of the child to the
gods, to whom that honor is due), do you be with me at supper."

Harpagus on hearing these words, when he had paid his homage, and had
congratulated himself that his fault had turned to so good account, and
that he was invited to the feast under such auspicious circumstances,
went to his own home. And as soon as he entered he sent his only son,
who was about thirteen years of age, and bade him go to Astyages, and do
whatever he should command; and then, being full of joy, he told his
wife what had happened. But when the son of Harpagus arrived, having
slain him and cut him into joints, Astyages roasted some parts of his
flesh and boiled others, and having had them well dressed, kept them in
readiness. At the appointed hour, when the other guests and Harpagus
were come, tables full of mutton were placed before the rest and
Astyages himself, but before Harpagus all the body of his son, except
the head, the hands and the feet; these were laid apart in a basket
covered over. When Harpagus seemed to have eaten enough, Astyages asked
him if he was pleased with the entertainment; and when Harpagus replied
that he was highly delighted, the officers appointed for that purpose
brought him the head of his son covered up with the hands and feet, and
standing before Harpagus, they bade him uncover the basket and take what
he chose. Harpagus doing as they desired, and uncovering the basket, saw
the remains of his son's body, but he expressed no alarm at the sight,
and retained his presence of mind; whereupon Astyages asked him if he
knew of what animal he had been eating. He said he knew very well, and
that whatever a king did was agreeable to him. After he had given this
answer he gathered the remains of the flesh and went home, purposing, as
I conjecture, to collect all that he could and bury it.

Astyages thus punished Harpagus; and then, considering what he should do
with Cyrus, summoned the Magi, who had formerly interpreted his dream.
When they were come, Astyages asked them in what way they had
interpreted his vision. They gave the same answer as before; and said
that if the boy was still alive, and had not already died, he must of
necessity be king. He answered them as follows: "The boy still survives,
and while living in the country, the boys of the village made him king,
and he has already performed all such things as kings really do, for he
has appointed guards, door-keepers, messengers, and all other things in
like manner; and now I desire to know to what do these things appear to
you to tend." The Magi answered, "If the boy be living and has already
been a king by no settled plan, you may take courage on his account and
make your mind easy, for he will not reign a second time. For some of
our predictions terminate in trifling results; and dreams, and things
like them, are fulfilled by slight events." To this Astyages replied: "I
too, O Magi, am very much of the same opinion, that since the child has
been named king, the dream is accomplished, and that the boy is no
longer an object of alarm to me; yet consider well, and carefully weigh
what will be the safest course for my family and yourselves." The Magi
answered: "O king, it is of great importance to us that your empire
should be firmly established, for otherwise it is alienated, passing
over to this boy, who is a Persian, and we, who are Medes, shall be
enslaved by Persians, and held in no account as being foreigners;
whereas while you, who are of our own country, are king, we have a share
in the government, and enjoy great honors at your hands. Thus, then, we
must on every account provide for your safety and that of your
government; and now if we saw any thing to occasion alarm we should tell
you of it beforehand; but now, since the dream has issued in a trifling
event, we ourselves take courage, and advise you to do the like, and to
send the boy out of your sight to his parents in Persia." When Astyages
heard this he was delighted, and, calling for Cyrus, said to him:
"Child, I have been unjust to you, by reason of a vain dream; but you
survive by your own destiny. Now go in happiness to Persia, and I will
send an escort to attend you; when you arrive there you will find a
father and mother very different from the herdsman Mitradates and his
wife."

Astyages thus sent Cyrus away, and, upon his arrival at the house of
Cambyses, his parents received him with the greatest tenderness and joy,
having been assured that he had died immediately after his birth; and
they inquired of him by what means his life had been preserved. He told
them, that till that time he believed he was the son of Astyages'
herdsman. He related that he had been brought up by the herdsman's wife;
and he went on constantly praising her.

[Illustration: EGYPTIAN HARE.]

When Cyrus had reached man's estate, and proved the most manly and
beloved of his equals in age, Harpagus paid great court to him, sending
him presents, from his desire to be avenged on Astyages; for he did not
see that he himself, who was but a private man, could be able to take
vengeance on Astyages; perceiving, therefore, that Cyrus was growing up
to be his avenger, he contracted a friendship with him, comparing the
sufferings of Cyrus with his own. And before this he had made the
following preparations. Seeing Astyages severe in his treatment of the
Medes, Harpagus holding intercourse with the chief persons of the
nation, one after another, persuaded them that they ought to place him
at their head, and depose Astyages. When he had effected his purpose,
and all was ready, Harpagus, wishing to discover his designs to Cyrus,
who resided in Persia, and having no other way left, because the roads
were all guarded, contrived the following artifice. Having cunningly
contrived a hare, by opening its belly, and tearing off none of the
hair, he put a letter, containing what he thought necessary to write,
into the body; and having sewed up the belly of the hare, he gave it
with some nets to the most trusty of his servants, dressed as a hunter,
and sent him to Persia; having by word of mouth commanded him to bid
Cyrus, as he gave him the hare, to open it with his own hand, and not to
suffer any one to be present when he did so. This was accordingly done,
and Cyrus having received the hare, opened it; and found the letter
which was in it, to the following purport: "Son of Cambyses, seeing the
gods watch over you, (for otherwise you could never have arrived at your
present fortune), do you now avenge yourself on your murderer Astyages;
for as far as regards his purpose you are long since dead, but by the
care of the gods and of me you survive. I suppose you have been long
since informed both what was done regarding yourself, and what I
suffered at the hands of Astyages, because I did not put you to death,
but gave you to the herdsman. Then, if you will follow my counsel, you
shall rule over the whole territory that Astyages now governs. Persuade
the Persians to revolt, and invade Media; and whether I or any other
illustrious Mede be appointed to command the army opposed to you, every
thing will turn out as you wish; for they, on the first onset, having
revolted from him, and siding with you, will endeavor to depose him.
Since, then, every thing is ready here, do as I advise, and do it
quickly."

Cyrus, upon receiving this intelligence, began to consider by what
measures he could best persuade the Persians to revolt. Having written
such a letter as he thought fit, he called an assembly of the Persians,
read the letter and said that Astyages had appointed him general of the
Persians: "Now," he continued, "I require you to attend me, every man
with a sickle." When all had come with their sickles, as had been
ordered, Cyrus selected a tract of land in Persia, about eighteen or
twenty stadia square (nearly two and one half miles), which was
overgrown with briers, and directed them to clear it during the day:
when the Persians had finished the appointed task, he bade them come
again on the next day, washed and well attired. In the meantime Cyrus
collected all his father's flocks and herds, had them killed and
dressed, to entertain the Persian forces, and provided wine and bread in
abundance. The next day, when the Persians had assembled, he made them
lie down on the turf, and feasted them; and, after the repast was over,
asked them whether the treatment they had received the day before, or
the present, was preferable. They answered, that the difference was
great; for on the preceding day they had every hardship, but on the
present everything that was good. Then Cyrus discovered his intentions,
and said: "Men of Persia, the case stands thus; if you will hearken to
me, you may enjoy these, and numberless other advantages, without any
kind of servile labor; but if you will not hearken to me, innumerable
hardships, like those of yesterday, await you. Now, therefore, obey me,
and be free; for I am persuaded I am born by divine providence to
undertake this work; and I deem you to be men in no way inferior to the
Medes, either in other respects or in war; then revolt with all speed
from Astyages."

The Persians under such a leader, gladly asserted their freedom, having
for a long time felt indignant at being governed by the Medes. Astyages,
informed of what Cyrus was doing, sent a messenger and summoned him; but
Cyrus bade the messenger take back word, "that he would come to him
sooner than Astyages desired." When Astyages heard this, he armed all
the Medes; and, as if the gods had deprived him of understanding, made
Harpagus their general, utterly forgetting the outrage he had done him.
And when the Medes came to an engagement with the Persians, such of them
as knew nothing of the plot, fought; but others went over to the
Persians; and the far greater part purposely behaved as cowards and
fled. As soon as the news was brought to Astyages that the Medes were
thus shamefully dispersed, he exclaimed: "Not even so shall Cyrus have
occasion to rejoice." His first act was to impale the Magi, who had
interpreted his dream, and advised him to let Cyrus go; then he armed
all the Medes that were left in the city, old and young; and leading
them out, engaged the Persians, and was defeated. Astyages himself was
made prisoner, and lost all the Medes whom he had led out. Harpagus,
standing by Astyages after he was taken, exulted over him and jeered at
him; and among other galling words, he asked him about the supper, at
which he had feasted him with his son's flesh, and inquired, "how he
liked slavery in exchange for a kingdom." Astyages, looking steadfastly
on Harpagus, asked in return, whether he thought himself the author of
Cyrus's success. Harpagus said, he did, for, as he had written, the
achievement was justly due to himself. Astyages thereupon proved him to
be "the weakest and most unjust of all men; the weakest, in giving the
kingdom to another, which he might have assumed to himself, if indeed he
had effected this change; and the most unjust, because he had enslaved
the whole nation of the Medes on account of the supper."

So Astyages, after he had reigned thirty-five years, was deposed. But
Cyrus kept him with him till he died, without doing him any further
injury. Thus did Cyrus come to the throne, conquer Crsus, and become
master of all Asia.

The Persians, according to my own knowledge, observe the following
customs:It is not their practice to erect statues, or temples, or
altars, but they charge those with folly who do so; because, as I
conjecture, they do not think the gods have human forms, as the Greeks
do. They are accustomed to ascend the highest parts of the mountains,
and offer sacrifice to Jupiter, and they call the whole circle of the
heavens by the name of Jupiter. They sacrifice to the sun and moon, to
the earth, fire, water, and the winds. To these alone they sacrificed in
the earliest times: but they have since learnt from the Arabians and
Assyrians to sacrifice to Venus Urania, whom the Assyrians call Venus
Mylitta, the Arabians, Alitta, and the Persians Mitra. They do not erect
altars nor kindle fires when about to sacrifice; they do not use
libations, or flutes, or fillets, or cakes; but, when any one wishes to
offer sacrifice to any one of these deities, he leads the victim to a
clean spot, and invokes the god, usually having his tiara decked with
myrtle. He that sacrifices is not permitted to pray for blessings for
himself alone; but he is obliged to offer prayers for the prosperity of
all the Persians, and the king, for he is himself included in the
Persians. When he has cut the victim into small pieces, and boiled the
flesh, he strews under it a bed of tender grass, generally trefoil, and
then lays all the flesh upon it; when he has put every thing in order,
one of the Magi standing by sings an ode concerning the original of the
gods, which they say is the incantation; and without one of the Magi it
is not lawful for them to sacrifice. After having waited a short time,
he that has sacrificed carries away the flesh and disposes of it as he
thinks fit. It is their custom to honor their birthday above all other
days; and on this day they furnish their table in a more plentiful
manner than at other times. The rich then produce an ox, a horse, a
camel, and an ass, roasted whole in an oven; but the poor produce
smaller cattle. They are moderate at their meals, but eat of many
after-dishes, and those not served up together. On this account the
Persians say, "that the Greeks rise hungry from the table, because
nothing worth mentioning is brought in after dinner, and that if
anything were brought in, they would not leave off eating." The Persians
are much addicted to wine. They are accustomed to debate the most
important affairs when intoxicated; but whatever they have determined on
in such deliberation, is on the following day, when they are sober,
proposed to them by the master of the house where they have met to
consult; and if they approve of it when sober also, then they adopt it;
if not, they reject it. And whatever they have first resolved on when
sober, they reconsider when intoxicated. When they meet one another in
the streets, one may discover by the following custom, whether those who
meet are equals. For instead of accosting one another, they kiss on the
mouth; if one be a little inferior to the other, they kiss the cheek;
but if he be of a much lower rank, he prostrates himself before the
other.

The Persians are of all nations the most ready to adopt foreign customs;
for they wear the Medic costume, thinking it handsomer than their own;
and in war they use the Egyptian cuirass. From the age of five years to
twenty, they instruct their sons in three things only: to ride, to use
the bow, and to speak the truth. Before he is five years of age, a son
is not admitted to the presence of his father, but lives entirely with
the women: the reason of this custom is, that if he should die in
childhood, he may occasion no grief to his father.

Now I much approve of the above custom, as also of the following, that
not even the king is allowed to put any one to death for a single crime,
nor any private Persian exercise extreme severity against any of his
domestics for one fault, but if on examination he should find that his
misdeeds are more numerous and greater than his services, he may in that
case give vent to his anger. They say that no one ever yet killed his
own father or mother. To tell a lie is considered by them the greatest
disgrace; next to that, to be in debt; for the reason that one who is in
debt must of necessity tell lies. Whosoever of the citizens has the
leprosy or scrofula, is not permitted to stay within a town, nor to have
communication with other Persians; and they say that a man is afflicted
with these diseases from having committed some offence against the sun.
Every stranger that is seized with these distempers they drive out of
the country; and they do the same to white pigeons, making the same
charge against them. They neither spit, nor wash their hands in a river,
but pay extreme veneration to all rivers. Another circumstance is also
peculiar to them which has escaped the notice of the Persians
themselves, but not of us. Their names, which correspond with their
personal forms and their rank, all terminate in the same letter (s)
which the Dorians call _San_, and the Ionians _Sigma_. If you inquire
into this you will find, that all Persian names, without exception, end
in the same letter. These things I can with certainty affirm to be true,
since I myself know them. But what follows, relating to the dead, is
only secretly mentioned, viz.: that the dead body of a Persian is never
buried until it has been torn by some bird or dog; but I know for a
certainty that the Magi do this, for they do it openly. The Persians
then, having covered the body with wax, conceal it in the ground. The
Magi differ very much from all other men, and particularly from the
Egyptian priests, for the latter hold it matter of religion not to kill
any thing that has life, except such things as they offer in sacrifice;
whereas the Magi kill every thing with their own hands, except a dog or
a man; and they think they do a meritorious thing, when they kill ants,
serpents, and other reptiles and birds.




CHAPTER VI.

THE ASIATIC GREEKS AND THE LYDIAN REVOLT.


The Ionians and olians, as soon as the Lydians were subdued by the
Persians, sent ambassadors to Cyrus at Sardis, wishing to become subject
to him, on the same terms as they had been to Crsus. But, when he heard
their proposal, he told them this story: "A piper seeing some fishes in
the sea, began to pipe, expecting that they would come to shore; but
finding his hopes disappointed, he took a casting-net, with which he
caught a great number of fishes, and drew them out. When he saw them
leaping about, he said to the fishes: 'Cease your dancing, since when I
piped you would not come out and dance.'" Cyrus told this story to the
Ionians and olians, because the Ionians, when Cyrus pressed them by his
ambassador to revolt from Crsus, refused to consent, and now, when the
business was done, were ready to listen to him. When the Ionians heard
this message, they severally fortified themselves with walls, and met
together at the Panionium, with the exception of the Milesians; for
Cyrus made an alliance with them on the same terms as the Lydians had
done. The rest of the Ionians resolved unanimously to send ambassadors
to Sparta, to implore them to succor the Ionians. These Ionians, to whom
the Panionium belongs, have built their cities under the finest sky and
climate of the world that we know of; for neither the regions that are
above it, nor those that are below, nor the parts to the east or west,
are at all equal to Ionia; for some of them are oppressed by cold and
rain, others by heat and drought. These Ionians do not all use the same
language, but have four varieties of dialect. Miletus, the first of
them, lies toward the south.

The Milesians were sheltered from danger, as they had made an alliance.
The islanders also had nothing to fear; for the Phnicians were not yet
subject to the Persians, nor were the Persians themselves at all
acquainted with maritime affairs. Now the Milesians had seceded from the
rest of the Ionians only for this reason, that weak as the Grecian race
then was, the Ionian was weakest of all, and of least account; for
except Athens, there was no other city of note. The other Ionians,
therefore, and the Athenians shunned the name, and would not be called
Ionians; and even now many of them appear to me to be ashamed of the
name. But these twelve cities gloried in the name, and built a temple
for their own use, to which they gave the name of Panionium.

When the ambassadors of the Ionians and olians arrived at Sparta, they
made choice of a Phocan, whose name was Pythermus, to speak in behalf
of all. Putting on a purple robe, in order that as many as possible of
the Spartans might hear of it and assemble, he addressed them at length,
imploring their assistance. But the Lacedmonians would not listen to
him, and determined not to assist the Ionians: they therefore returned
home. Yet the Lacedmonians, though they had rejected the Ionian
ambassadors, despatched men in a penteconter, to keep an eye upon the
affairs of Cyrus and Ionia. These men arriving in Phoca, sent the most
eminent person among them, whose name was Lacrines, to Sardis, to warn
Cyrus in the name of the Lacedmonians, "not to injure any city on the
Grecian territory, for in that case they would not pass it by
unnoticed." When the herald gave this message, it is related that Cyrus
inquired of the Greeks who were present, who the Lacedmonians were, and
how many in number, that they sent him such a warning. And when
informed, he said to the Spartan herald, "I was never yet afraid of
those, who in the midst of their city have a place set apart, in which
they collect and cheat one another by false oaths; and if I continue in
health, not the calamities of the Ionians shall be talked about, but
their own." This taunt of Cyrus was levelled at the Greeks in general,
who have markets for the purposes of buying and selling; for the
Persians have no such a thing as a market. After this, Cyrus intrusted
Tabalus a Persian with the government of Sardis, and appointed Pactyas a
Lydian to bring away the gold, both that belonging to Crsus and to the
other Lydians, and departed with Cyrus for Ecbatana, for from the first
he took no account of the Ionians. But Babylon was an obstacle to him,
as were also the Bactrians, the Sac, and the Egyptians; against whom he
resolved to lead an army in person, and to send some other general
against the Ionians. But as soon as Cyrus had marched from Sardis,
Pactyas prevailed on the Lydians to revolt from Tabalus and Cyrus; and
going down to the sea-coast, with all the gold taken from Sardis in his
possession, he hired mercenaries and persuaded the inhabitants of the
coast to join him; and then having marched against Sardis, he besieged
Tabalus, who was shut up in the citadel.

When Cyrus heard this news on his march, he said to Crsus;

"Crsus, what will be the end of these things? the Lydians, it seems,
will never cease to give trouble to me, and to themselves. I am in doubt
whether it will not be better to reduce them to slavery; for I appear to
have acted like one who, having killed the father, has spared the
children; so I am carrying away you, who have been something more than a
father to the Lydians, and have intrusted their city to the Lydians
themselves: and then I wonder at their rebellion!" Crsus, fearing lest
he should utterly destroy Sardis, answered: "Sir, you have but too much
reason for what you say; yet do not give full vent to your anger, nor
utterly destroy an ancient city, which is innocent as well of the former
as of the present offence: for of the former I myself was guilty, and
now bear the punishment on my own head; but in the present instance
Pactyas, to whom you intrusted Sardis, is the culprit; let him therefore
pay the penalty. But pardon the Lydians, and enjoin them to observe the
following regulations, to the end that they may never more revolt, nor
be troublesome to you: send to them and order them to keep no weapons of
war in their possession; and enjoin them to wear tunics under their
cloaks, and buskins on their feet; and require them to teach their sons
to play on the cithara, to strike the guitar, and to sell by retail; and
then you will soon see them becoming women instead of men, so that they
will never give you any apprehensions about their revolting." Crsus
suggested this plan, thinking it would be more desirable for the
Lydians, than that they should be sold for slaves; and being persuaded,
that unless he could suggest some feasible proposal, he should not
prevail with him to alter his resolution: and he dreaded also, that the
Lydians, if they should escape the present danger, might hereafter
revolt from the Persians, and bring utter ruin on themselves. Cyrus,
pleased with the expedient, laid aside his anger, and said that he would
follow his advice: then having sent for Mazares, a Mede, he commanded
him to order the Lydians to conform themselves to the regulations
proposed by Crsus, and moreover to enslave all the rest who had joined
the Lydians in the attack on Sardis; but by all means to bring Pactyas
to him alive. Cyrus having given these orders on his way, proceeded to
the settlements of the Persians. But Pactyas heard that the army which
was coming against him was close at hand, and fled in great
consternation to Cyme. Mazares marched against Sardis with an
inconsiderable division of Cyrus's army, but found that Pactyas and his
party were no longer there. He, however, compelled the Lydians to
conform to the injunctions of Cyrus; who, by his order, completely
changed their mode of life: after this Mazares despatched messengers to
Cyme, requiring them to deliver up Pactyas. But the Cymans, in order to
come to a decision, resolved to refer the matter to the deity at
Branchid, for an oracular shrine was there erected in former times,
which all the Ionians and olians were in the practice of consulting.
The Cymans asked the oracle "what course they should pursue respecting
Pactyas, that would be most pleasing to the gods:" the answer to their
question was, that they should deliver up Pactyas to the Persians. When
this answer was reported, they determined to give him up; but,
Aristodicus the son of Heraclides, a man of high repute among the
citizens, distrusting the oracle, and suspecting the sincerity of the
consulters, prevented them from doing so; till at last other messengers,
among whom was Aristodicus, went to inquire a second time concerning
Pactyas. When they arrived at Branchid, Aristodicus consulted the
oracle in the name of all, inquiring in these words: "O king, Pactyas, a
Lydian, has come to us as a suppliant, to avoid a violent death at the
hands of the Persians. They now demand him, and require the Cymans to
give him up. We, however, though we dread the Persian power, have not
yet dared to surrender the suppliant, till it be plainly declared by
thee what we ought to do." The oracle gave the same answer as before.
Upon this Aristodicus deliberately acted as follows; walking round the
temple, he took away all the sparrows and all other kinds of birds that
had built nests in the temple; whereupon a voice issued from the
sanctuary; addressing Aristodicus, it spoke as follows: "O most impious
of men, how darest thou do this? Dost thou tear my suppliants from my
temple?" Aristodicus without hesitation answered, "O king, art thou then
so careful to succor thy suppliants, but biddest the Cymans to deliver
up theirs?" The oracle again rejoined: "Yes, I bid you do so; that
having acted impiously, ye may the sooner perish, and never more come
and consult the oracle about the delivering up of suppliants." When the
Cymans heard this latter answer, not wishing to bring destruction on
themselves by surrendering Pactyas, or to subject themselves to a siege
by protecting him, they sent him away to Mitylene. But the Mitylenans,
when Mazares sent a message to them requiring them to deliver up
Pactyas, were preparing to do so for some remuneration; what, I am
unable to say precisely, for the proposal was never completed. For the
Cymans, being informed of what was being done by the Mitylenans,
despatched a vessel to Lesbos, and transported Pactyas to Chios, whence
he was torn by violence from the temple of Minerva Poliuchus by the
Chians, and delivered up. The Chians delivered him up in exchange for
Atarneus, a place situate in Mysia, opposite Lesbos. In this manner
Pactyas fell into the hands of the Persians; who kept him under guard in
order that they might deliver him to Cyrus. For a long time after this,
none of the Chians would offer barley-meal from Atarneus to any of the
gods, or make any cakes of the fruit that came from them; but all the
productions of that country were excluded from the temples. Mazares,
after this, marched against those who had assisted in besieging Tabalus;
and in the first place reduced the Prienians to slavery, and in the next
overran the whole plain of the Mander, and gave it to his army to
pillage; and he treated Magnesia in the same manner: but shortly
afterward fell sick and died.

On his death Harpagus came down as his successor in the command; he also
was by birth a Mede, the same whom Astyages king of the Medes
entertained at the impious feast, and who assisted Cyrus in ascending
the throne. This man being appointed general by Cyrus, on his arrival in
Ionia, took several cities by means of earth-works; for he forced the
people to retire within their fortifications, and then, having heaped up
mounds against the walls, he carried the cities by storm. Phoca was the
first place in Ionia that he attacked.

These Phocans were the first of all the Greeks who undertook long
voyages, and they are the people who discovered the Adriatic and
Tyrrhenian seas, Iberia, and Tartessus.[7] They made their voyages in
fifty-oared galleys, and not in merchant-ships. When they arrived at
Tartessus they were kindly received by the king of the Tartessians,
whose name was Arganthonius; he reigned eighty years over Tartessus, and
lived to the age of one hundred and twenty. The Phocans became such
great favorites with him, that he at first solicited them to abandon
Ionia, and to settle in any part of his territory they should choose;
but afterward, finding he could not prevail with them to accept his
offer, and hearing from them the increasing power of the Mede, he gave
them money for the purpose of building a wall around their city; he must
have given it unsparingly, for the wall is not a few stades in
circumference, and is entirely built of large and well-compacted stones.
When Harpagus had marched his army against the Phocans, he besieged
them, but offered these terms: "that he would be content if the Phocans
would throw down only one of their battlements, and consecrate one house
_to the king's use_." The Phocans, detesting slavery, said, "that they
wished for one day to deliberate, and would then give their answer"; but
while they were deliberating they required him to draw off his forces
from the wall. Harpagus said, that "though he well knew their design,
yet he would permit them to consult together." In the interval, then,
during which Harpagus withdrew his army from the wall, the Phocans
launched their fifty-oared galleys, and having put their wives,
children, and goods on board, together with the images from the temples
and other offerings, except works of bronze or stone, or pictures, they
embarked themselves, and set sail for Chios: and the Persians took
possession of Phoca, abandoned by all its inhabitants. The Phocans,
when the Chians refused to sell them the nyss Islands, for fear they
should become the seat of trade, and their own island be thereby
excluded, directed their course to Cyrnus; where, by the admonition of
an oracle, they had twenty years before built a city, named Alalia. But
Arganthonius was at that time dead. On their passage to Cyrnus, having
first sailed down to Phoca, they put to death the Persian garrison
which had been left by Harpagus to guard the city. Afterward, when this
was accomplished, they pronounced terrible imprecations on any who
should desert the fleet; besides this, they sunk a mass of red-hot iron,
and swore "that they would never return to Phoca, till this burning
mass should appear again." Nevertheless, as they were on their way
toward Cyrnus, more than one half of the citizens were seized with
regret and yearning for their city and dwellings in the country, and
violating their oaths, sailed back to Phoca; but such of them as kept
to their oath weighed anchor and sailed from the nyss Islands. On
their arrival at Cyrnus they lived for five years in common with the
former settlers: but as they ravaged the territories of all their
neighbors, the Tyrrhenians and Carthaginians combined together to make
war against them, each with sixty ships: and the Phocans, on their
part, having manned their ships, consisting of sixty in number, met them
in the Sardinian Sea; and having engaged, the Phocans obtained a kind
of Cadmean victory;[8] for forty of their own ships were destroyed, and
the twenty that survived were disabled, for their prows were blunted.
They therefore sailed back to Alalia, took on board their wives and
children, with what property their ships were able to carry, and leaving
Cyrnus, sailed to Rhegium. As to the men belonging to the ships
destroyed, most of them fell into the hands of the Carthaginians and
Tyrrhenians, who took them on shore and stoned them to death. But
afterward all animals belonging to the Argyllans that passed by the
spot where the Phocans who had been stoned lay, became distorted,
maimed, and crippled, as well sheep, as beasts of burden and men. The
Argyllans, therefore, being anxious to expiate the guilt, sent to
Delphi; and the Pythian enjoined them to use those rites which they
still observe; for they commemorate their death with great magnificence,
and have established gymnastic and equestrian contests. This was the
fate of these Phocans; but the others, who fled to Rhegium, left that
place, and got possession of the town in the territory of notria, which
is now called Hyela, which they colonized by the advice of a certain
Posidonian, who told them the Pythia had directed them to establish
sacred rites to Cyrnus as being a hero, but not to colonize the island
of that name.

The Teians also acted nearly in the same manner as the Phocans. For
when Harpagus by means of his earth-works had made himself master of
their walls, they all went on board their ships, and sailed away to
Thrace, and there settled in the city of Abdera; which Timesius of
Clazomen having formerly founded, did not enjoy, but was driven out by
the Thracians, and is now honored as a hero by the Teians of Abdera.

These were the only Ionians who abandoned their country rather than
submit to servitude. The rest, except the Milesians, gave battle to
Harpagus, and as well as those who abandoned their country, proved
themselves brave men, each fighting for his own; but defeated and
subdued, they remained in their own countries, and submitted to the
commands imposed on them. The Milesians, as I have before mentioned,
having made a league with Cyrus, remained quiet. So was Ionia a second
time enslaved, and the islanders, dreading the same fate, made their
submission to Cyrus. When the Ionians were brought into this wretched
condition, and nevertheless still held assemblies at Panionium, I am
informed that Bias of Priene gave them most salutary advice, which, had
they harkened to him, would have made them the most flourishing of all
the Greeks. He advised, "that the Ionians, should sail in one common
fleet to Sardinia, and there build one city for all the Ionians; thus
being freed from servitude, they would flourish, inhabiting the most
considerable of the islands, and governing the rest; whereas if they
remained in Ionia, he saw no hope of recovering their liberty." But
before Ionia was ruined, the suggestion of Thales, the Milesian, who was
of Phnician extraction, was also good, who advised that the Ionians
should constitute one general council in Teos, which stands in the
centre of Ionia; and that the rest of the inhabited cities should be
governed as independent states.

Harpagus having subdued Ionia, marched against the Carians, Cannians,
Lycians, Ionians, and olians; of whom the Carians were by far the most
famous of all nations in those times. They introduced three inventions
which the Greeks have adopted. For the Carians set the example of
fastening crests upon helmets and of putting devices on shields; they
are also the first who attached handles to shields; until their time all
who used shields carried them without handles, guiding them with
leathern thongs, having them slung round their necks and left shoulders.

The Lycians were originally sprung from Crete, for in ancient time Crete
was entirely in the possession of barbarians. But a dispute having
arisen between Sarpedon and Minos, sons of Europa, respecting the
sovereign power, when Minos got the upper hand in the struggle, he drove
out Sarpedon with his partisans; and they being expelled came to the
land of Milyas in Asia, and were afterwards joined by Lycus son of
Pandion of Athens, who was likewise driven out by his brother geus, and
came to be called Lycians after him. Their customs are partly Cretan and
partly Carian; but they have one peculiar to themselves, in which they
differ from all other nations: they take their name from their mothers
and not from their fathers; so that if any one asks another who he is,
he will describe himself by his mother's side, and reckon his ancestry
in the female line. And if a free-born woman marry a slave, the children
are accounted of pure birth; but if a man though a citizen, and of high
rank, marry a foreigner, the children are considered low born.

All Cnidia, except a small space, is surrounded by water; for the
Ceramic gulf bounds it on the north, and on the south the sea by Syme
and Rhodes: now this small space, which is about five stades in breadth,
the Cnidians, wishing to make their territory insular, designed to dig
through, while Harpagus was subduing Ionia. For the whole of their
dominions were within the isthmus; and where the Cnidian territory
terminates toward the continent, there is the isthmus that they designed
to dig through. But, as they were carrying on the work with great
diligence, the workmen appeared to be wounded to a greater extent and in
a more strange manner than usual, both in other parts of the body, and
particularly in the eyes, by the chipping of the rock; they therefore
sent deputies to Delphi to inquire what was the cause of the
obstruction; and, as the Cnidians say, the Pythia answered as follows in
trimeter verse: "Build not a tower on the isthmus, nor dig it through,
for Jove would have made it an island had he so willed." So the Cnidians
desisted from their work, and surrendered without resistance to
Harpagus, as soon as he approached with his army. The Pedasians were
situated inland above Halicarnassus. When any mischief is about to
befall them or their neighbors, the priestess of Minerva has a long
beard: this has three times occurred. These were the only people about
Caria who opposed Harpagus for any time and gave him much trouble, by
fortifying a mountain called Lyda. After some time, however, they were
subdued. The Lycians, when Harpagus marched his army toward the Xanthian
plain, went out to meet him, and engaging with very inferior numbers,
displayed great feats of valor. But being defeated and shut up within
their city, they collected their wives, children, property, and servants
within the citadel, and then set fire to it and burnt it to the ground.
When they had done this, and engaged themselves by the strongest oaths,
all the Xanthians went out and died fighting. Of the modern Lycians, who
are said to be Xanthians, all, except eighty families, are strangers;
but these eighty families happened at the time to be away from home and
so survived. Thus Harpagus got possession of Xanthus and Caunia almost
in the same manner; for the Caunians generally followed the example of
the Lycians.




CHAPTER VII.

THE CONQUEST OF ASSYRIA AND THE WAR WITH THE MASSAGET.


While Harpagus was reducing the lower parts of Asia, Cyrus had conquered
the upper parts, subduing every nation without exception. The greatest
parts of these I shall pass by without notice; but I will make mention
of those which gave him most trouble, and are most worthy of being
recorded.

Assyria contains many large cities, the most renowned and the strongest
of which, where the seat of government was established after the
destruction of Nineveh, was Babylon, which is of the following
description. The city stands in a spacious plain, and is quadrangular,
and shows a front on every side of one hundred and twenty stades [15
miles]; these stades make up the sum of four hundred and eighty in the
whole circumference. It was adorned in a manner surpassing any city we
are acquainted with. In the first place, a moat deep, wide, and full of
water, runs entirely round it; next, there is a wall fifty royal cubits
in breadth [about 84 feet], and in height two hundred [270 feet], but
the royal cubit is larger than the common one by three fingers' breadth.
And here I think I ought to explain how the earth, taken out of the
moat, was consumed, and in what manner the wall was built. As they dug
the moat they made bricks of the earth that was taken out; and when they
had moulded a sufficient number they baked them in kilns. Then making
use of hot asphalt for cement, and laying wattled reeds between the
thirty bottom courses of bricks, they first built up the sides of the
moat, and afterward the wall itself in the same manner; and on the top
of the wall, at the edges, they built dwellings of one story, fronting
each other, having spaces between these dwellings wide enough to turn a
chariot with four horses. In the circumference of the wall there were a
hundred gates, all of bronze, as also were the posts and lintels. Eight
days' journey from Babylon [200 miles] stands another city, called Is,
on a small river of the same name, which discharges its stream into the
Euphrates; this river brings down with its water many lumps of bitumen,
from which the bitumen used in the wall of Babylon was taken. The city
consists of two divisions, for the Euphrates, separates it in the
middle: this river, which is broad, deep, and rapid, flows from Armenia,
and falls into the Red Sea. The wall on either bank has an elbow carried
down to the river; and thence along the curvatures of each bank runs a
wall of baked bricks. The city itself, which is full of houses three and
four stories high, is cut up into straight streets running at right
angles to each other. At the end of each street a little gate is formed
in the wall along the river side, in number equal to the streets; and
they are all made of bronze, and lead down to the edge of the river.
This outer wall is the chief defence, but another wall runs round
within, not much inferior to the other in strength, though narrower. In
the middle of each division of the city fortified buildings were
erected; in one, the royal palace, with a spacious and strong enclosure,
bronze-gated; and in the other, the precinct of Jupiter Belus, which in
my time was still in existence, a square building of two stades [ of a
mile] on every side. In the midst of this precinct is built a solid
tower of one stade both in length and breadth, and on this tower rose
another, and another upon that, to the number of eight. And there is an
ascent to these outside, running spirally round all the towers. About
the middle of the ascent there is a landing-place and seats on which
those who go up may rest themselves; and in the uppermost tower stands a
spacious temple, handsomely furnished, and in it a large couch, with a
table of gold by its side. No statue has been erected within it, but as
the Chaldans, who are priests of this deity, assert, though I cannot
credit what they say, the god himself comes to the temple and reclines
on the bed, in the same manner as the Egyptians say happens at Thebes in
Egypt.

There is also another temple below, within the precinct at Babylon; in
it is a large golden statue of Jupiter seated, and near it a great table
of gold; the throne also and the step are of gold, which together weigh
eight hundred talents [twenty-two tons], as the Chaldans affirm.
Outside the temple is a golden altar; and another large altar, where
full-grown sheep are sacrificed; for on the golden altar only sucklings
may be offered. On the great altar the Chaldans consume yearly a
thousand talents [twenty-seven tons] of frankincense when they celebrate
the festival of this god. There was also at that time within the
precincts of this temple a statue of solid gold, twelve cubits high
[eighteen feet]; I, indeed, did not see it, but only relate what is said
by the Chaldans. Darius, son of Hystaspes, formed a design to take away
this statue, but dared not do so; but Xerxes, son of Darius, took it,
and killed the priest who forbade him to remove it.

There were many others who reigned over Babylon, whom I shall mention in
my Assyrian history, who beautified the walls and temples, and amongst
them were two women. The first of these, named Semiramis, lived five
generations before the other; she raised mounds along the plain, which
are worthy of admiration; for before, the river used to overflow the
whole plain like a sea. But the other, who was queen next after her, and
whose name was Nitocris, (and she was much more sagacious than the other
queen,) in the first place left monuments of herself, which I shall
presently describe; and in the next place, when she saw the power of the
Medes growing formidable and restless, and that, among other cities,
Nineveh was captured by them, she took every possible precaution for her
own defence. First of all, the River Euphrates, which before ran in a
straight line, and which flows through the middle of the city, by having
channels dug above, she made so winding, that in its course it touched
three times at one and the same village in Assyria, called Arderica: and
to this day, those who go from our sea to Babylon, if they travel by the
Euphrates, come three times to this village on three successive days.
She also raised on either bank of the river a mound, astonishing for its
magnitude and height. At a considerable distance above Babylon, she had
a reservoir for a lake dug, carrying it out some distance from the
river, and in the depth digging down to water, and in width making its
circumference of four hundred and twenty stades [about fifty-two and a
half miles]: she consumed the soil from this excavation by heaping it up
on the banks of the river, and when it was completely dug, she had
stones brought and built a casing to it all round. She had both these
works done, the river made winding, and the whole excavation a lake, in
order that the current, being broken by frequent turnings, might be more
slow, and the navigation to Babylon tedious, and that after the voyage,
a long march round the lake might follow. All this was done in that part
of the country where the approach to Babylon is nearest, and where is
the shortest way for the Medes; in order that the Medes might not, by
holding intercourse with her people, become acquainted with her affairs.
She enclosed herself, therefore, with these defences by digging, and
immediately afterwards made the following addition. As the city
consisted of two divisions, which were separated by the river, during
the reign of former kings, when any one had occasion to cross from one
division to the other, he was obliged to cross in a boat: and this, in
my opinion, was very troublesome: she therefore provided for this, for
after she had dug the reservoir for the lake, she left this other
monument built by similar toil. She had large blocks of stone cut, and
when they were ready and the place was completely dug out, she turned
the whole stream of the river into the place she had dug: while this was
filling, and the ancient channel had become dry, in the first place, she
lined with burnt bricks the banks of the river throughout the city, and
the descents that lead from the gates to the river, in the same manner
as the walls. In the next place, about the middle of the city, she built
a bridge with the stones she had prepared, and bound them together with
plates of lead and iron. Upon these stones she laid, during the day,
square planks of timber, on which the Babylonians might pass over; but
at night these planks were removed, to prevent people from crossing by
night and robbing one another. When the hollow that was dug had become a
lake filled by the river, and the bridge was finished, she brought back
the river to its ancient channel from the lake.

[Illustration: WINGED HUMAN-HEADED LION.]

The same queen also contrived the following deception. Over the most
frequented gate of the city she prepared a sepulchre for herself, high
up above the gate itself; and on the sepulchre she had engraved,
SHOULD ANY ONE OF MY SUCCESSORS, KINGS OF BABYLON, FIND HIMSELF IN
WANT OF MONEY, LET HIM OPEN THIS SEPULCHRE, AND TAKE AS MUCH AS HE
CHOOSES; BUT IF HE BE NOT IN WANT, LET HIM NOT OPEN IT; FOR THAT WERE
NOT WELL. This monument remained undisturbed, until the kingdom
fell to Darius; but it seemed hard to Darius that this gate should be of
no use, and that when money was lying there, and this money inviting him
to take it, he should not do so; but no use was made of this gate for
this reason, that a dead body was over the head of any one who passed
through it. He therefore opened the sepulchre, and instead of money,
found only the body, and these words written: HADST THOU NOT BEEN
INSATIABLY COVETOUS, AND GREEDY OF THE MOST SORDID GAIN, THOU WOULDEST
NOT HAVE OPENED THE CHAMBERS OF THE DEAD.

Cyrus made war against the son of this queen, who bore the name of his
father Labynetus, and had the empire of Assyria. Now when the great king
leads his army in person, he carries with him from home well prepared
provisions and cattle; and he takes with him water from the river
Choaspes, which flows past Susa, of which alone, the king drinks. A
great number of four-wheeled carriages drawn by mules carry the water of
this river, after it has been boiled in silver vessels, and follow him
from place to place wherever he marches. Cyrus, in his march against
Babylon, arrived at the river Gyndes, whose fountains are in the
Matianian mountains, and which flows through the land of the Dardanians,
and falls into another river, the Tigris; the latter, flowing by the
city of Opis, discharges itself into the Red Sea. When Cyrus was
endeavoring to cross this river Gyndes, which can be passed only in
boats, one of the sacred white horses through wantonness plunged into
the stream, and attempted to swim over, but the stream having carried
him away and drowned him, Cyrus was much enraged with the river for this
affront, and threatened to make his stream so weak, that henceforth
women should easily cross it without wetting their knees. After this
menace, deferring his expedition against Babylon, he divided his army
into two parts; and marked out by lines one hundred and eighty channels,
on each side of the river, diverging every way; then having distributed
his army, he commanded them to dig. His design was indeed executed by
the great numbers he employed; but they spent the whole summer in the
work. When Cyrus had avenged himself on the river Gyndes, by
distributing it into three hundred and sixty channels, and the second
spring began to shine, he then advanced against Babylon. But the
Babylonians, having taken the field, awaited his coming; and when he had
advanced near the city, the Babylonians gave battle, and, being
defeated, were shut up in the city. But as they had been long aware of
the restless spirit of Cyrus, and saw that he attacked all nations
alike, they had laid up provisions for many years; and therefore were
under no apprehensions about a siege. On the other hand, Cyrus found
himself in difficulty, since much time had elapsed, and his affairs were
not at all advanced. Whether therefore some one else made the suggestion
to him in his perplexity, or whether he himself devised the plan, he had
recourse to the following stratagem. Having stationed the bulk of his
army near the passage of the river where it enters Babylon, and again
having stationed another division beyond the city, where the river makes
its exit, he gave orders to his forces to enter the city as soon as they
should see the stream fordable. Having thus stationed his forces, and
given these directions, he himself marched away with the ineffective
part of his army; and coming to the lake, Cyrus did the same with
respect to the river and the lake as the queen of the Babylonians had
done. For having diverted the river, by means of a canal, into the lake,
which was before a swamp, he made the ancient channel fordable by the
sinking of the river. When this took place, the Persians who were
appointed to that purpose close to the stream of the river, which had
now subsided to about the middle of a man's thigh, entered Babylon by
this passage. If, however, the Babylonians had been aware of it
beforehand, or had known what Cyrus was about, they would not have
suffered the Persians to enter the city, but would have utterly
destroyed them; for having shut all the little gates that lead down to
the river, and mounting the walls that extend along the banks of the
river, they would have caught them as in a net; whereas the Persians
came upon them by surprise. It is related by the people who inhabited
this city, that on account of its great extent, when they who were at
the extremities were taken, those of the Babylonians who inhabited the
centre knew nothing of the capture (for it happened to be a festival)
but they were dancing at the time, and enjoying themselves, till they
received certain information of the truth. Thus was Babylon taken for
the first time.[9]

How great was the power of the Babylonians, I can prove by many other
circumstances, and especially by the following. The whole territory over
which the great king reigns, is divided into districts for the purpose
of furnishing subsistence for him and his army, in addition to the usual
tribute; of the twelve months in the year, the Babylonian territory
provides him with subsistence for four, and all the rest of Asia for the
remaining eight; so that the territory of Assyria amounts to a third
part of the power of all Asia, and the government of this region, which
the Persians call a satrapy, is remunerative; since it yielded a full
artabe of silver every day to Tritchmes son of Artabazus, who held this
district from the king: the artabe is a Persian measure, containing
three Attic chnices more than the Attic medimnus [or about twelve and a
half gallons]. And he had a private stud of horses, in addition to those
used in war, of eight hundred stallions, and sixteen thousand mares. He
kept, too, such a number of Indian dogs, that four considerable towns in
the plain were exempted from all other taxes and appointed to find food
for the dogs. Such were the advantages accruing to the governor of
Babylon. The land of Assyria is but little watered by rain, only enough
in fact to nourish the root of the corn; the stalk grows up, and the
grain comes to maturity only by being irrigated from the river, not, as
in Egypt, by the river overflowing the fields, but by the hand and by
engines. The Babylonian territory, like Egypt, is intersected by canals;
and the largest of these is navigable, stretching in the direction of
the winter sunrise[10]; and it extends from the Euphrates to another
river, the Tigris, on which the city of Nineveh stood. This is, of all
lands with which we are acquainted, by far the best for the growth of
corn: but it does not carry produce trees of any kind, either the fig,
or the vine, or the olive; yet it is so fruitful in the produce of corn,
that it yields continually two hundred-fold, and when it produces its
best, it yields even three hundred-fold. The blades of wheat and barley
grow there to fully four fingers (three inches) in breadth; and though I
well know to what a height millet and sesama grow, I shall not mention
it; for I am well assured, that to those who have never been in the
Babylonian country, what has been said concerning its productions will
appear to many incredible. They use no other oil than such as is drawn
from sesama. They have palm-trees growing all over the plain; most of
these bear fruit from which they make bread, wine, and honey. They also
tie the fruit of that which the Greeks call the male palm, about those
trees that bear dates, in order that the fly entering the date may ripen
it, lest otherwise the fruit may fall before maturity; for the male
palms have flies in the fruit, just like wild fig-trees.

The most wonderful thing of all, next to the city itself, is what I am
now going to describe: their vessels that sail down the river to Babylon
are circular, and made of leather. For when they have cut the ribs out
of willows that grow in Armenia above Babylon, they cover them with
hides extended on the outside, by way of a bottom; not making any
distinction in the stern, nor contracting the prow, but making them
circular like a buckler; then having lined this vessel throughout with
reeds, they suffer it to be carried down by the river freighted with
merchandise, chiefly casks of palm-wine. The vessel is steered by two
spars, held by two men standing upright, one of whom draws his spar in
and the other thrusts his out. Some of these vessels are made very
large, and others of a smaller size; but the largest of them carry a
cargo of five thousand talents [about one hundred and thirty-five tons].
Every vessel has a live ass on board, and the larger ones more. For
after they arrive at Babylon, and have disposed of their freight, they
sell the ribs of the boat and all the reeds by public auction; then
having piled the skins on the asses, they return by land to Armenia, for
it is not possible by any means to sail up the river because of the
rapidity of the current: and for this reason they make their vessels of
skins and not of wood, and upon their return to Armenia with their
asses, they construct other vessels in the same manner. For their dress,
they wear a linen tunic that reaches down to the feet; over this they
put another garment of wool, and over all a short white cloak; they have
sandals peculiar to the country, very much like the Botian clogs. They
wear long hair, binding their heads with turbans, and anoint the whole
body with perfumes. Every man has a seal, and a staff curiously wrought;
and on every staff is carved either an apple, a rose, a lily, an eagle,
or something of the kind; for it is not allowable to wear a stick
without a device.

Many curious customs prevail amongst them. This, in my opinion, is the
wisest, which I hear the Venetians, of Illyria, also practise. Once a
year, in every village, whatever maidens are of a marriageable age, they
collect together and bring in a body to one place; around them gathers a
crowd of men. Then a crier having made them stand up one by one, offers
them for sale, beginning with the most beautiful; and when she has been
sold for a large sum, he puts up another who is next in beauty. They are
sold on condition that they shall be married. Such men among the
Babylonians as are rich and desirous of marrying, bid against one
another, and purchase the handsomest. But such of the lower classes as
are desirous of marrying, do not require a beautiful form, but are
willing to take the plainer damsels with a sum of money. So when the
crier has finished selling the handsomest of the maidens, he makes the
ugliest stand up, or one that is a cripple, and puts her up to auction,
for the person who will marry her with the smallest sum, until she is
knocked down to the man who offers to take the least. This money is that
obtained from the sale of the handsome maidens; so that the beautiful
ones portion out the ugly and the crippled. A father is not allowed to
give his daughter in marriage to whom he pleases, nor can a purchaser
carry off a maiden without security; but he is first obliged to give
security that he will certainly marry her, and then he may take her
away. If they do not agree, a law has been enacted that the money shall
be repaid. It is also lawful for any one who pleases to come from
another village and purchase. They have also this other custom, second
only to the former in wisdom. They bring their sick to the market-place,
for they have no physicians; then those who pass by the sick person
confer with him about the disease, to discover whether they have
themselves been afflicted with the same disease, or have seen others so
afflicted. They then advise him to have recourse to the same treatment
as that by which they escaped a similar disease, or have known to cure
others. And no one passes by a sick person in silence, without inquiring
into the nature of his distemper. They embalm their dead in honey, and
their funeral lamentations are like those of the Egyptians.

There are three tribes among them that eat nothing but fish; these, when
they have taken and dried them in the sun, they treat in the following
manner: they put them into a mortar, and having pounded them with a
pestle, sift them through a fine cloth; then, whoever pleases, kneads
them into a cake, or bakes them like bread.

When Cyrus had conquered this nation, he was anxious to reduce the
Massaget to subjection. This nation is said to be both powerful and
valiant, dwelling toward the east and the rising sun beyond the river
Araxes, over against the Issedonians; there are some who say that this
nation is Scythian. The Araxes is reported by some persons to be
greater, by others less, than the Ister; they say that there are many
islands in it, some nearly equal in size to Lesbos; and that in them are
men, who during the summer feed upon all manner of roots, which they dig
out of the ground; and that they store up for food ripe fruits which
they find on the trees, and feed upon these during the winter. They add,
that they have discovered other trees that produce fruit of a peculiar
kind, which the inhabitants, when they meet together in companies, and
have lighted a fire, throw on it, as they sit around in a circle; and
that, inhaling the fumes of the burning fruit that has been thrown on,
they become intoxicated by the odor, just as the Greeks do by wine; and
that the more fruit is thrown on, the more intoxicated they become,
until they rise up to dance and betake themselves to singing. The river
Araxes flows from the Matienian mountains, whence also springs the river
Gyndes, which Cyrus distributed into the three hundred and sixty
trenches; and it gushes out from forty springs, all of which, except
one, discharge themselves into fens and swamps, in which it is said men
live who feed on raw fish, and clothe themselves in the skins of
sea-calves; but the one stream of the Araxes flows through an
unobstructed channel into the Caspian Sea. The Caspian is a sea by
itself, having no communication with any other sea; for the whole of
that which the Greeks navigate, and that beyond the Pillars, called the
Atlantic, and the Red Sea, are all one. But the Caspian is a separate
sea of itself; being in length a fifteen-days' voyage for a rowing boat;
and in breadth, where it is widest, an eight-days' voyage. On the
western shore of this sea stretches the Caucasus, which is in extent the
largest, and in height the loftiest, of all mountains; it contains
within itself many various nations of men, who for the most part live
upon the produce of wild fruit-trees. In this country, it is said, there
are trees which produce leaves of such a nature, that by rubbing them
and mixing them with water the people paint figures on their garments;
these figures do not wash out, but grow old with the wool, as if they
had been woven in from the first. East of the Caspian is a plain in
extent unbounded in the prospect. A great portion of this extensive
plain is inhabited by the Massaget, against whom Cyrus resolved to make
war; for the motives that urged and incited him to this enterprise were
many and powerful: first of all his birth, which he thought was
something more than human; and secondly, the good fortune which had
attended him in his wars; for wherever Cyrus directed his arms, it was
impossible for that nation to escape.

A woman whose husband was dead, was queen of the Massaget; her name was
Tomyris; and Cyrus sent ambassadors under pretence of wooing her, and
made her an offer of marriage. But Tomyris, being aware that he was not
wooing her, but the kingdom of the Massaget, forbade their approach.
Upon this Cyrus, perceiving his artifice ineffectual, marched to the
Araxes, and openly prepared to make war on the Massaget, by throwing
bridges over the river, and building turrets on the boats which carried
over his army. While he was employed in this work Tomyris sent a herald
to him with this message: "King of the Medes, desist from your great
exertions; for you cannot know if they will terminate to your advantage;
and having desisted, reign over your own dominions, and bear to see me
governing what is mine. But if you will not attend to my advice, and
prefer every thing before peace; in a word, if you are very anxious to
make trial of the Massaget, toil no longer in throwing a bridge over
the river; but do you cross over to our side, while we retire three
days' march from the river; or if you had rather receive us on your
side, do you the like." When Cyrus heard this proposal, he called a
council of the principal Persians, laid the matter before them, and
demanded their opinion as to what he should do: they unanimously advised
him to let Tomyris pass with her army into his territory. But Crsus the
Lydian, who was present and disapproved this advice, delivered a
contrary opinion to that which was put forward, and said: "O king, I
assured you long ago, that since Jupiter delivered me into your hands, I
would to the utmost of my power avert whatever misfortune I should see
impending over your house; and my own calamities,[11] sad as they are,
have been lessons to me. If you think yourself immortal, and that you
command an army that is so too, it is needless for me to make known to
you my opinion. But if you know that you too are a man, and that you
command such as are men, learn this first of all, that there is a wheel
in human affairs, which, continually revolving, does not suffer the same
persons to be always successful. My opinion touching the matter before
us is wholly at variance with that already given. For if we shall
receive the enemy into this country, there is danger that if you are
defeated, you will lose, besides, your whole empire; for it is plain
that if the Massaget are victorious, they will not flee home again, but
will march upon your territories: and if you are victorious, your
victory is not so complete as if, having crossed over into their
territory, you should conquer the Massaget and put them to flight; for
then you can march directly into the dominions of Tomyris. It is a
disgrace too that Cyrus the son of Cambyses should give way and retreat
before a woman. My opinion, therefore, is, that you should pass over and
advance as far as they retire; and then, by the following stratagem,
endeavor to get the better of them. I hear the Massaget are
unacquainted with the Persian luxuries, and are unused to the comforts
of life. Suppose then that you cut up and dress an abundance of cattle,
and lay out a feast in our camp for these men; and besides, bowls of
unmixed wine without stint; then leave the weakest part of your army
behind, while the rest return again toward the river; for the Massaget,
if I mistake not, when they see so much excellent fare, will turn to
immediately, and after that there remains for us the display of mighty
achievements."

Cyrus approved the suggestions of Crsus and bade Tomyris retire, as he
would cross over to her. She accordingly retired, as she had promised.
Cyrus placed Crsus in the hands of his son Cambyses, to whom he also
intrusted the kingdom, and having strictly charged him to honor Crsus,
and treat him well in case his inroad on the Massaget should fail, sent
them back to Persia and crossed the river with his army. When he had
passed the Araxes, and night came on, he saw a vision, as he was
sleeping in the country of the Massaget. He fancied that he saw the
eldest son of Hystaspes with wings on his shoulders; and that with one
of these he overshadowed Asia, and with the other Europe. Now Darius,
who was then about twenty years of age, was the eldest son of Hystaspes,
son of Arsames, one of the Achmenides; and he had been left in Persia,
for he had not yet attained the age of military service. When Cyrus
awoke he considered his dream with attention; and as it seemed to him of
great moment, he summoned Hystaspes, and taking him aside, said:
"Hystaspes, your son has been detected plotting against me and my
empire; and I will show you how I know it for a certainty. The gods
watch over me and forewarn me of every thing that is about to befall me.
Now, last night, as I was sleeping, I saw the eldest of your sons with
wings on his shoulders, and with one of these he overshadowed Asia, and
Europe with the other; from this vision, it cannot be otherwise than
that your son is forming designs against me; do you therefore go back to
Persia with all speed, and take care, that when I have conquered these
people and return home, you bring your son before me to be examined."
Cyrus spoke thus under a persuasion that Darius was plotting against
him; but the deity forewarned him that he himself would die in that very
expedition, and that his kingdom would devolve on Darius. Hystaspes,
however, answered in these words: "God forbid, O king, that a Persian
should be born who would plot against you! But if any such there be, may
sudden destruction overtake him, for you have made the Persians free
instead of being slaves, and instead of being ruled over by others to
rule over all; but if any vision informs you that my son is forming any
plot against you, I freely surrender him to you to deal with as you
please." And Hystaspes repassed the Araxes and went to Persia, for the
purpose of keeping his son Darius in custody for Cyrus.

[Illustration: SEPULCHRAL VASES.]

Cyrus having advanced one day's march from the Araxes, proceeded to act
according to the suggestion of Crsus. After this, when Cyrus and the
effective part of the Persian army had marched back to the Araxes,
leaving the ineffective part behind, a third division of the army of the
Massaget attacked those of Cyrus' forces that had been left behind,
and, after some resistance, put them to death. Then, seeing the feast
laid out, as soon as they had overcome their enemies they lay down and
feasted; and being filled with food and wine, fell asleep. Then the
Persians attacked them, and put many of them to death, and took a still
greater number prisoners, among them the son of Queen Tomyris, who
commanded the Massaget, and whose name was Spargapises. When she heard
what had befallen her army and her son, she sent a herald to Cyrus with
the following message: "Cyrus, insatiate with blood, be not elated with
what has now happened, that by the fruit of the vine, with which ye
yourselves, when filled with it, so rave, that when it descends into
your bodies, evil words float on your lips; be not elated, that by such
a poison you have deceived and conquered my son, instead of by prowess
in battle. But take the good advice that I offer you. Restore my son;
depart out of this country unpunished for having insolently disgraced a
third division of the army of the Massaget. But if you will not do
this, I swear by the sun, the Lord of the Massaget, that, insatiable as
you are, I will glut you with blood." Cyrus, however, paid no attention
to this message; but Spargapises, the son of Queen Tomyris, as soon as
he recovered from the effects of the wine, and perceived in what a
plight he was, begged of Cyrus that he might be freed from his fetters;
and as soon as he was set free, and found his hands at liberty, he put
himself to death. But Tomyris, finding Cyrus did not listen to her,
assembled all her forces, and engaged with him. I think that this battle
was the most obstinate that was ever fought between barbarians. First of
all, they stood at a distance and used their bows; afterward, when they
had emptied their quivers, they engaged in close fight with their swords
and spears, and thus they continued fighting for a long time, and
neither was willing to give way; but at length the Massaget got the
better, and the greater part of the Persian army was cut in pieces on
the spot, and Cyrus himself was killed, after he had reigned twenty-nine
years. Tomyris filled a skin with human blood, sought for the body of
Cyrus among the slain of the Persians, and thrust the head into the
skin, and insulting the dead body, said: "Thou hast indeed ruined me
though alive and victorious in battle, since thou hast taken my son by
stratagem; but I will now glut thee with blood, as I threatened." Of the
many accounts given of the end of Cyrus, this appears to me most worthy
of credit.

The Massaget resemble the Scythians in their dress and mode of living;
they have both horse and foot bow-men, and javelin-men, who are
accustomed to carry battle-axes: they use gold and bronze for every
thing; for in whatever concerns spears, and arrow-points, and
battle-axes, they use bronze; but the head, and belts, and
shoulder-pieces, are ornamented with gold. In like manner with regard to
the chest of horses, they put on breastplates of bronze; but the
bridle-bit and cheek-pieces are ornamented with gold. They make no use
of silver or iron, for neither of those metals are found in their
country, but they have bronze and gold in abundance. Their manners are
as follows: when a man has attained a great age, all his kinsmen meet,
and sacrifice him, together with cattle of several kinds; and when they
have boiled the flesh, they feast on it. This death they account the
most happy; but they do not eat the bodies of those who die of disease;
but bury them in the earth, and think it a great misfortune that they
did not reach the age to be sacrificed. They sow nothing, but live on
cattle, and fish which the river Araxes yields in abundance, and they
are drinkers of milk. They worship the sun only of all the gods, and
sacrifice horses to him; and they assign as the reason of this custom
that they think it right to offer the swiftest of all animals to the
swiftest of all the gods.

[1] Under the name "barbarians" the Greeks included all who were not
sprung from themselvesall who did not speak the Greek language.

[2] Syria was at that time the name of Cappadocia, as Herodotus himself
elsewhere states.

[3] It is generally agreed that the name of Lycurgus's nephew was not
Leobotas, but Charilaus. See the life of Lycurgus in the "Boys' and
Girls' Plutarch."

[4] There is a Scriptural account of Ecbatana, in the Apocrypha. Judith
i 1-4.

[5] Major Robinson states that the seven colors described by Herodotus,
are those employed by the Orientals, to denote the seven planetary
bodies.

[6] Several passages of our author seem to prove that Herodotus wrote
other histories than those which have come down to us. Elsewhere in this
book he speaks of his Assyrian history; and the second of the Libyan.

[7] Tartessus was situated between the two branches of the Btis, now
the Guadalquiver.

[8] A proverbial expression signifying "that the victors suffered more
than the vanquished."

[9] It was again taken by Darius; see end of Book III.

[10] That is, southeast.

[11] These words "pathemata mathemata" seem to have been a proverb in
the Greek.

[Illustration: GYPTUS]




_BOOK II. EUTERPE._




CHAPTER I.

PHYSICAL HISTORY OF EGYPT.


After the death of Cyrus, Cambyses succeeded to the kingdom. He was son
of Cyrus, and Cassandane the daughter of Pharnaspes; she having died
some time before, Cyrus deeply mourned for her himself, and commanded
all his subjects to mourn. Cambyses then considered the Ionians and
olians as his hereditary slaves, and when he made an expedition against
Egypt, he took with him some of the Greeks over whom he bore rule.

The Egyptians, before the reign of Psammitichus, considered themselves
to be the most ancient of mankind. But after Psammitichus came to the
throne, he endeavored to ascertain who really were the most ancient, and
from that time they have considered the Phrygians to have been an older
race than themselves. When Psammitichus was unable, by inquiry, to
discover any solution of the question, who were the most ancient of men,
he devised this expedient. He gave two new-born children of poor parents
to a shepherd, to be brought up among his flocks, with strict orders
that no one should utter a word in their presence, that they should lie
in a solitary room by themselves, and that the shepherd should bring
goats' milk to them at certain times, and listen to discover what word
the children would first articulate, after they had given over their
insignificant mewlings. When the shepherd had pursued this plan for the
space of two years, one day as he opened the door and went in, both the
children fell upon him, and holding out their hands, cried "Becos." At
first the shepherd said nothing; but as this same word was repeated to
him whenever he went and tended the children, he at length acquainted
his master, and by his command brought the children into his presence.
When Psammitichus heard it he inquired what people call any thing by the
name of "Becos"; and discovered that the Phrygians call bread by that
name. So the Egyptians, convinced by the experiment, allowed that the
Phrygians were more ancient than themselves. This relation I had from
the priests of Vulcan at Memphis. But the Greeks tell many other foolish
things, among them, that Psammitichus, having had the tongues of some
women cut out, had the children brought up by them.

The Egyptians were the first to discover the year, which they divided
into twelve parts, making this discovery from the stars; and so, I
think, they act more wisely than the Greeks, who insert an intercalary
month every third year, on account of the seasons; while the Egyptians,
reckoning twelve months of thirty days each, add five days each year
above that number, so that the circle of the seasons comes round to the
same point. They say also, that the Egyptians were the first who
introduced the names of the twelve gods, and that the Greeks borrowed
those names from them; that they were the first to assign altars,
images, and temples to the gods, and to carve the figures of animals on
stone. They add that Menes was the first mortal who reigned over Egypt,
and that in his time all Egypt, except the district of Thebes, was a
morass, and that no part of the land that now exists below Lake Myris
was then above water; to this place from the sea is a seven-days'
passage up the river. It is evident to a man of common understanding,
who sees it, that the part of Egypt which the Greeks frequent with their
shipping, is land reclaimed by the Egyptians, and a gift from the river;
for when you are at the distance of a day's sail from land, if you cast
the lead you will bring up mud, yet find yourself in eleven fathoms of
water; showing the immense alluvial deposit.

[Illustration: THE TWO GREAT PYRAMIDS AT THE TIME OF THE INUNDATION.]

The length of Egypt along the sea-coast is sixty schni (450 miles) from
the Plinthinetic Bay to Lake Serbonis, near which Mount Casius
stretches. Men who are short of land measure their territory by fathoms;
those who have some possessions, by stades; those who have much, by
parasangs; and such as have a very great extent, by schni. A parasang
is equal to thirty stades, and each schnus, which is an Egyptian
measure, is equal to sixty stades. So the whole coast of Egypt is three
thousand six hundred stades in length. As far as Heliopolis, inland,
Egypt is wide, flat, without water, and a swamp. The distance to
Heliopolis, as one goes up from the sea, is about equal in length to the
road from Athensthat is to say, from the altar of the twelve gods,to
Pisa and the temple of Olympian Jupiter, or about fifteen hundred
stades. From Heliopolis upward Egypt is narrow, for on one side the
table-land of Arabia extends from north to south and southwest,
stretching up continuously to that which is called the Red Sea. In this
plateau are the stone quarries which were cut for the pyramids at
Memphis. Where its length is the greatest, I have heard that it is a
two-months' journey from east to west; and that eastward its confines
produce frankincense. On that side of Egypt which borders upon Libya
extends another rocky table-land covered with sand, on which the
pyramids stand, stretching in the same direction as that part of the
Arabian mountain that runs southward.

The greater part of all this country, as the priests informed me, has
been reclaimed by the Egyptians from the sea and the marshes. For the
space beyond the city of Memphis seems to me to have been formerly a bay
of the sea; as is the case also with the parts about Ilium, Teuthrania,
Ephesus, and the plain of the Mander, if I may be permitted to compare
small things with great. There are other rivers not equal in size to the
Nile, which have wrought great works; amongst them one of the most
remarkable is the Achelous which, flowing through Acarnania, and falling
into the sea, has already converted one half of the Echinades islands
into a continent. There is in the Arabian territory, not far from Egypt,
branching from the Red Sea, a bay of the sea of such a length that the
voyage, from the innermost part of this bay to the broad sea, occupies
forty days for a vessel with oars; but the width, where the bay is
widest, only half a day's passage, and in it an ebb and flow takes place
daily; and I am of opinion that Egypt was formerly a similar bay; this
stretching from the Northern Sea toward Ethiopia; and the Arabian Bay,
which I am describing, from the south toward Syria; and that they almost
perforated their recesses so as to meet each other, overlapping to some
small extent. Now, if the Nile were to turn its stream into this Arabian
gulf, what could hinder it from being filled with soil by the river
within twenty thousand years?for my part, I think it would be filled
within ten thousand. How, then, in the time that has elapsed before I
was born, might not even a much greater bay than this have been filled
up by such a great and powerful river? I therefore give credit to those
who relate these things concerning Egypt, when I see that Egypt projects
beyond the adjoining land; that shells are found on the mountains; that
a saline humor forms on the surface so as even to corrode the pyramids;
and that this mountain which is above Memphis is the only one in Egypt
that abounds in sand: add to which, that Egypt, in its soil, is neither
like Arabia or its confines, nor Libya, nor Syria, but is black and
crumbling, as if it were mud and alluvial deposit, brought down by the
river from Ethiopia; whereas we know that the earth of Libya is reddish,
and somewhat more sandy; and that of Arabia and Syria is clayey and
flinty.

The priests relate that in the reign of Mris, when the river rose at
least eight cubits, it irrigated all Egypt below Memphis; and yet Mris
had not been nine hundred years dead when I received this information.
But now, unless the river rises sixteen cubits, or fifteen at least, it
does not overflow the country. It appears to me, therefore, that if the
soil continues to grow in height, in the same proportion, those
Egyptians below Lake Mris, who inhabit other districts than that which
is called Delta, must, by reason of the Nile not overflowing their land,
for ever suffer the same calamity which they used to say the Greeks
would suffer from. For hearing that all the lands of Greece were watered
by rain, and not by rivers, as their own was, they said "that the Greeks
at some time or other would suffer miserably from famine." But let me
state how the matter stands with the Egyptians themselves: if, as I said
before, the land below Memphis should continue to increase in height in
the same proportion as it has done in time past, what else will happen
but that the Egyptians who inhabit this part will starve, if their land
shall neither be watered by rain, nor the river be able to inundate the
fields? Now, indeed, they gather in the fruits of the earth with less
labor than any other people, for they have not the toil of breaking up
the furrows with the plough, nor of hoeing, nor of any other work which
all other men must labor at to obtain a crop of corn; but when the river
has come of its own accord and irrigated their fields, and again
subsided, then each man sows his own land and turns swine into it; and
when the seed has been trodden in by the swine, he waits for
harvest-time; then he treads out the corn with his swine, and gathers it
in.

All Egypt, beginning from the cataracts and the city of Elephantine, is
divided into two parts, and partakes of both names; one belongs to
Libya, and the other to Asia. The Nile, beginning from the cataracts,
flows to the sea, dividing Egypt in the middle. Now, as far as the city
of Cercasorus, the Nile flows in one stream; but from that point it is
divided into three channels. That which runs eastward is called the
Pelusiac mouth; another of the channels bends westward, and is called
the Canopic mouth; but the direct channel of the Nile is the following:
descending from above, it comes to the point of the Delta, where it
divides the Delta in the middle, and discharges itself into the sea,
supplying by this channel, not by any means the least quantity of water,
nor the least renowned; this is called the Sebennytic mouth. There are
also two other mouths, that diverge from the Sebennytic and flow into
the sea,the Saitic, and the Mendesian. The Bolbitine and Bucolic mouths
are not natural, but artificial. The Nile, when full, inundates not only
Delta, but also part of the country said to belong to Libya and Arabia,
to the extent of about two days' journey on each side.

At the summer solstice it fills and overflows for a hundred days; then
falls short in its stream, and retires; so that it continues low all the
winter, until the return of the summer solstice. In parts of Ethiopia,
out of which the Nile flows, the inhabitants become black from the
excessive heat; kites and swallows continue there all the year; and the
cranes, to avoid the cold of Scythia, migrate to these parts as
winter-quarters.

[Illustration: NILE BOAT.]

With respect to the sources of the Nile, no man of all the Egyptians,
Libyans, or Greeks with whom I have conversed, ever pretended to know
any thing; except the registrar of Minerva's treasury at Sais in Egypt.
But even he seemed to be trifling with me, when he said he knew
perfectly well. His account was: "That there are two mountains rising
into a sharp peak, situated between the cities of Syene and Elephantine;
the names of these mountains are Crophi and Mophi. The sources of the
Nile, which are bottomless, flow from between these mountains, and half
of the water flows north over Egypt, and the other half to the southward
over Ethiopia. That the fountains of the Nile are bottomless, he said,
Psammitichus, king of Egypt, proved by experiment; for he twisted a line
many thousand fathoms in length and let it down, but could not find a
bottom." In my opinion, this simply proves that there are strong
whirlpools and an eddy here; so that the water beating against the
rocks, a sounding-line, when let down, cannot reach the bottom. As you
ascend the river above the city of Elephantine, the country is so steep
that it is necessary to attach a rope on both sides of a boat as you do
with an ox in a plough, and so proceed; but if the rope should happen to
break, the boat is carried away by the force of the stream. This kind of
country lasts for a four-days' passage (or eighty miles), and the Nile
here winds as much as the Mander. After that you come to a level plain,
where the Nile flows round an island named Tachompso. Ethiopians inhabit
the country immediately above Elephantine, and one half of the island;
the other half is inhabited by Egyptians. Near to this island lies a
vast lake, on the borders of which Ethiopian nomads dwell; after sailing
through this lake, you come to the channel of the Nile, which flows into
it: then you have to land and travel forty days by the side of the
river, for sharp rocks rise in the Nile, and there are many sunken ones,
through which it is not possible to navigate a boat; you then must go on
board another boat, and sail for twelve days; and will at last arrive at
a large city called Meroe: this city is said to be the capital of all
Ethiopia. The inhabitants worship no other gods than Jupiter and
Bacchus; but these they honor with great magnificence; they have also an
oracle of Jupiter; and they make war, whenever that god bids them by an
oracular warning, and against whatever country he bids them. Sailing
from this city, you will arrive at the country of the Automoli, in a
space of time equal to that which you took in coming from Elephantine to
the capital of the Ethiopians. These Automoli are called by the name of
Asmak, which in the language of Greece signifies, "those that stand at
the left hand of the king." These, to the number of two hundred and
forty thousand of the Egyptian war-tribe, once revolted to the
Ethiopians, whose king made them the following recompense. There were
certain Ethiopians disaffected toward him; he bade them expel these, and
take possession of their land; by the settlement of these men among
them, the Ethiopians became more civilized, and learned the manners of
the Egyptians.




CHAPTER II.

RELIGION, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, DRESS, AND ANIMALS OF THE EGYPTIANS.


Egypt possesses more wonders than any other country, and exhibits works
greater than can be described, in comparison with all other regions;
therefore more must be said about it. The Egyptians besides having a
peculiar climate and a river differing in its nature from all other
rivers, have adopted customs and usages in almost every respect
different from the rest of mankind. Amongst them the women attend
markets and traffic, but the men stay at home and weave. Other nations,
in weaving, throw the wool upward; the Egyptians, downward. The men
carry burdens on their heads; the women, on their shoulders. No woman
can serve the office for any god or goddess; but men are employed for
both offices. Sons are not compelled to support their parents unless
they choose, but daughters are compelled to do so, whether they choose
or not. In other countries the priests of the gods wear long hair; in
Egypt they have it shaved. With other men it is customary in mourning
for the nearest relations to have their heads shorn; the Egyptians, on
occasions of death, let the hair grow both on the head and face, though
till then shaven. Other men feed on wheat and barley, but it is a very
great disgrace for an Egyptian to make food of them; but they make bread
from spelt, which some call zea. They knead the dough with their feet;
but mix clay with their hands. Every man wears two garments; the women,
but one. Other men fasten the rings and sheets of their sails outside;
but the Egyptians, inside. The Greeks write and cipher, moving the hand
from left to right; but the Egyptians, from right to left: and doing so,
they say they do it right-ways, and the Greeks left-ways. They have two
sorts of letters, one of which is called sacred, the other common.

They are of all men the most excessively attentive to the worship of the
gods, and observe the following ceremonies: They drink from cups of
bronze, which they scour every day. They wear linen garments, constantly
fresh-washed, thinking it better to be clean than handsome. The priests
shave their whole body every third day, that no impurity may be found
upon them when engaged in the service of the gods. The priests wear
linen only, and shoes of byblus, and are not permitted to wear any other
garments, or other shoes. They wash themselves in cold water twice every
day and twice every night, and use a great number of ceremonies. On the
other hand, they enjoy no slight advantages, for they do not consume or
expend any of their private property; but sacred food is cooked for
them, and a great quantity of beef and geese is allowed each of them
every day, with wine from the grape; but they must not taste of fish.
Beans the Egyptians do not sow at all in their country, nor do they eat
those that happen to grow there. The priests abhor the sight of that
pulse, accounting it impure. The service of each god is performed, not
by one, but by many priests, of whom one is chief; and, when one of them
dies, his son is put in his place. The male kine they deem sacred to
Epaphus, and to that end prove them in the following manner: If the
examiner finds one black hair upon him, he adjudges him to be unclean;
one of the priests appointed for this purpose makes this examination,
both when the animal is standing up and lying down; and he draws out the
tongue, to see if it is pure as to the prescribed marks, which I shall
mention in another part of my history. He also looks at the hairs of his
tail, to see whether they grow naturally. If the beast is found pure in
all these respects, he marks it by rolling a piece of byblus round the
horns, and then having put on it some sealing earth, he impresses it
with his signet; and so they drive him away. Any one who sacrifices one
that is unmarked is punished with death. The established mode of
sacrifice is this: they lead the victim, properly marked, to the altar
where they intend to sacrifice, and kindle a fire; then having poured
wine upon the altar, near the victim, they invoke the god, and kill it;
then cut off the head, and flay the body of the animal. Having
pronounced many imprecations on the head, they who have a market and
Greek merchants dwelling amongst them, carry it there and sell it; but
those who have no Greeks amongst them throw it into the river; and they
pronounce the following imprecations on the head: "If any evil is about
to befall either those that now sacrifice, or Egypt in general, may it
be averted on this head." But a different mode of disembowelling and
burning the victims prevails in different sacrifices. The practice with
regard to the goddess whom they consider the greatest, and in whose
honor they celebrate the most magnificent festival, is this: When they
have flayed the bullocks, having first offered up prayers, they take out
all the intestines, and leave the vitals with the fat in the carcass:
they then cut off the legs and the extremity of the hip, with the
shoulders and neck, and fill the body of the bullock with fine bread,
honey, raisins, figs, frankincense, myrrh, and other perfumes, and burn
it, pouring on it a great quantity of oil. They sacrifice after they
have fasted; and while the sacred things are being burnt, they all beat
themselves; after which they spread a banquet of what remains of the
victims.

All the Egyptians sacrifice the pure male kine and calves, but they are
not allowed to sacrifice the females, for they are sacred to Isis; the
image of Isis is made in the form of a woman with the horns of a cow, as
the Greeks represent Io; and all Egyptians alike pay a far greater
reverence to cows than to any other cattle. No Egyptian man or woman
will kiss a Greek on the mouth; or use the knife, spit, or cauldron of a
Greek, or taste of the flesh of a pure ox that has been divided by a
Greek knife. They bury the kine that die in the following manner: The
females they throw into the river, and the males they inter in the
suburbs, with one horn, or both, appearing above the ground, for a mark.
When it is putrified, and the appointed time arrives, a raft comes to
each city from the island called Prosopitis, in the Delta, which is nine
schni in circumference. Now in this island Prosopitis there are several
cities; but that from which the rafts come to take away the bones of the
oxen, is called Atarbechis; in it a temple of Venus has been erected.
From this city then many persons go about to other towns; and having dug
up the bones, carry them away, and bury them in one place; and they bury
all other cattle that die in the same way that they do the oxen; for
they do not kill any of them. All those who have a temple erected to
Theban Jupiter, or belong to the Theban district, abstain from sheep,
and sacrifice goats only. For the Egyptians do not all worship the same
gods in the same manner, except Isis and Osiris, who, they say, is
Bacchus. On the other hand, those who frequent the temple of Mendes, and
belong to the Mendesian district, abstain from goats, and sacrifice
sheep. The Thebans say that this custom was established among them in
the following way: that Hercules was very desirous of seeing Jupiter,
but Jupiter was unwilling to be seen by him; at last, however, as
Hercules persisted, Jupiter flayed a ram, cut off the head, and held it
before himself, and then having put on the fleece, showed himself to
Hercules. From this circumstance the Egyptians make the image of Jupiter
with a ram's face; and the Ammonians, who are a colony of Egyptians and
Ethiopians, and who speak a language between both, have adopted the same
practice; and, as I conjecture, the Ammonians thus derived their name,
for the Egyptians call Jupiter, Ammon. The Thebans then do not sacrifice
rams, being for this reason accounted sacred by them; on one day in the
year, however, at the festival of Jupiter, they kill and flay one ram,
put it on this image of Jupiter, and bring an image of Hercules to it;
then all who are in the temple beat themselves in mourning for the ram,
and bury him in a sacred vault.

Of this Hercules I have heard that he is one of the twelve gods; but of
the other Hercules, who is known to the Greeks, I could never hear in
any part of Egypt. That the Egyptians did not derive the name of
Hercules from the Greeks, but rather the Greeks from the Egyptians, I
have many proofs to show. The parents of this Hercules, Amphitryon and
Alcmene, were both of Egyptian descent, and the Egyptians say they do
not know the names of Neptune and the Dioscuri, yet if they had derived
the name of any deity from the Greeks, they would certainly have
mentioned these above all others, since even at that time they made
voyages, and some of the Greeks were sailors. But Hercules is one of the
ancient gods of the Egyptians; and they say themselves it was seventeen
thousand years before the reign of Amasis, when the number of their gods
was increased from eight to twelve, of whom Hercules was accounted one.
Being desirous of obtaining certain information from whatever source I
could, I sailed to Tyre in Phnicia, having heard that there was there a
temple dedicated to Hercules; and I saw it richly adorned with a great
variety of offerings, and in it were two pillars, one of fine gold, the
other of emerald stone, both shining exceedingly at night. Conversing
with the priests of this god, I inquired how long this temple had been
built, and I found that they did not agree with the Greeks. For they
said that the temple was built at the time when Tyre was founded, and
that two thousand three hundred years had elapsed since the foundation
of Tyre. In this city I also saw another temple dedicated to Hercules by
the name of Thasian; I went therefore to Thasos, and found there a
temple of Hercules built by the Phnicians, who founded Thasos, when
they sailed in search of Europa, and this occurred five generations
before Hercules the son of Amphitryon appeared in Greece. The researches
then that I have made evidently prove that Hercules is a god of great
antiquity, and therefore those Greeks appear to me to have acted most
correctly, who have built two kinds of temples sacred to Hercules, and
who sacrifice to one as an immortal, under the name of Olympian, and
paid honor to the other as a hero. The Mendesians pay reverence to all
goats; at the death of a he-goat public mourning is observed throughout
the whole Mendesian district.

The Egyptians consider the pig to be an impure beast, and therefore if a
man in passing by a pig should touch him only with his garments, he
forthwith goes to the river and plunges in; and in the next place,
swineherds, although native Egyptians, are the only men who are not
allowed to enter any of their temples; neither will any man give his
daughter in marriage to one of them, nor take a wife from among them;
but the swineherds intermarry among themselves. The Egyptians do not
think it right to sacrifice swine to any deities but the moon and
Bacchus. In this sacrifice of pigs to the moon, when the sacrificer has
slain the victim, he puts together the tip of the tail, with the spleen
and the caul, covers them with the fat found about the belly of the
animal, and consumes them with fire: the rest of the flesh they eat
during the full moon in which they offer the sacrifices; but on no other
day would any one even taste it. The poor amongst them, through want of
means, form pigs of dough, and having baked them, offer them in
sacrifice.

Whence each of the gods sprung, whether they existed always, and of what
form they were, was, so to speak, unknown till yesterday. For I am of
opinion that Hesiod and Homer lived four hundred years before my time,
and not more, and these were they who framed a theogony for the Greeks,
and gave names to the gods, and assigned to them honors and arts, and
declared their several forms.

The Egyptians were also the first who introduced public festivals,
processions, and solemn supplications; and the Greeks learned these from
them. The Egyptians hold public festivals several times in a year; that
which is best and most rigidly observed is in the city of Bubastis, in
honor of Diana; the second, in the city of Busiris, is in honor of Isis;
the largest temple of Isis is in this city, in the middle of the
Egyptian Delta. Isis is in the Grecian language called Demeter. The
third festival is held at Sais, in honor of Minerva; the fourth, at
Heliopolis, in honor of the sun; the fifth, at the city of Buto, in
honor of Latona; the sixth, at the city of Papremis, in honor of Mars.
When they are assembled at the sacrifice, in the city of Sais, they all
on a certain night kindle a great number of lamps in the open air,
around their houses; the lamps are flat vessels filled with salt and
oil, the wick floats on the surface and burns all night; hence the
festival is named "the lighting of lamps." The Egyptians who do not come
to this public assembly observe the rite of sacrifice, and all kindle
lamps, not only in Sais, but throughout all Egypt.

Egypt, though bordering on Libya, does not abound in wild beasts; but
all that they have are accounted sacred. Superintendents, consisting
both of men and women, are appointed to feed every kind separately; and
the son succeeds the father in this office. All the inhabitants of the
cities perform their vows to the superintendents. Having made a vow to
the god to whom the animal belongs, they shave either the whole heads of
their children, or a half, or a third part of the head, and then weigh
the hair in a scale against silver, and whatever the weight may be, they
give to the superintendent of the animals; she in return cuts up some
fish, and gives it as food to the animals; such is the usual mode of
feeding them. Should any one kill one of these beasts, if wilfully,
death is the punishment; if by accident, he pays such fine as the
priests choose to impose. But whoever kills an ibis or a hawk, whether
wilfully or by accident, must necessarily be put to death. When a
conflagration takes place, a supernatural impulse seizes on the cats.
The Egyptians, standing at a distance, take care of the cats, and
neglect to put out the fire; but the cats often make their escape, leap
over the men, and throw themselves into the fire; when this happens
great lamentations are made among the Egyptians. In whatever house a cat
dies of a natural death, all the family shave their eyebrows; but if a
dog die, they shave the whole body and the head. All cats that die are
carried to certain sacred houses, where they are first embalmed, and
then buried in the city of Bubastis. All persons bury their dogs in
sacred vaults within their own city; and ichneumons are buried in the
same manner as the dogs; but field-mice and hawks they carry to the city
of Buto; the ibis to Hermopolis; the bears, which are few in number, and
the wolves, which are not much larger than foxes, they bury wherever
they are found lying.

[Illustration: THE TROCHILUS.]

This is the nature of the crocodile:During the four coldest months it
eats nothing, and though it has four feet, it is amphibious. It lays its
eggs on land, and there hatches them. It spends the greater part of the
day on the dry ground, but the whole night in the river; for the water
is then warmer than the air and dew. Of all living things with which we
are acquainted, this, from the least beginning, grows to be the largest.
For it lays eggs little larger than those of a goose, and the young is
at first in proportion to the egg; but when grown up it reaches to the
length of seventeen cubits (25 feet), and even more. It has the eyes of
a pig, large teeth, and projecting tusks: it is the only animal that has
no tongue: it does not move the lower jaw, but is the only animal that
brings down its upper jaw to the under one. It has strong claws, and a
skin covered with scales, that cannot be broken on the back. It is blind
in the water, but very quick-sighted on land; and because it lives for
the most part in the water, its mouth is filled with leeches. All other
birds and beasts avoid him, but he is at peace with the trochilus,
because he receives benefit from that bird. For when the crocodile gets
out of the water on land, and then opens its jaws, which it does most
commonly toward the west, the trochilus enters its mouth and swallows
the leeches: the crocodile is so well pleased with this service that it
never hurts the trochilus. With some of the Egyptians crocodiles are
sacred; with others not, but they treat them as enemies. Those who dwell
about Thebes, and Lake Mris consider them to be very sacred; and they
each of them train up a crocodile, which is taught to be quite tame; and
put crystal and gold ear-rings into their ears, and bracelets on their
fore paws; they give them appointed and sacred food, and treat them as
well as possible while alive, and when dead they embalm them, and bury
them in sacred vaults. But the people who dwell about the city of
Elephantine eat them, not considering them sacred. They are not called
crocodiles by the Egyptians, but "champs"; the Ionians gave them the
name of crocodiles, because they thought they resembled lizards, which
are also so called, and which are found in the hedges of their country.
The modes of taking the crocodile are many and various, but I shall only
describe that which seems to me most worthy of relation. When the
fisherman has baited a hook with the chine of a pig, he lets it down
into the middle of the river, and holding a young live pig on the brink
of the river, beats it; the crocodile, hearing the noise, goes in its
direction, and meeting with the chine, swallows it, and the men draw it
to land; when it is drawn out on shore, the sportsman first of all
plasters its eyes with mud, after which he manages it very easily; but
until he has done this, he has a great deal of trouble. The hippopotamus
is esteemed sacred in the district of Papremis, but not so by the rest
of the Egyptians. It is a quadruped, cloven-footed, with the hoofs of an
ox, snub-nosed, has the mane of a horse, projecting tusks, and the tail
and neigh of a horse. In size he is equal to a very large ox: his hide
is so thick that spear-handles are made of it when dry. Otters are also
met with in the river, which are deemed sacred; and amongst fish, they
consider that which is called the lepidotus, and the eel, sacred; these
they say are sacred to the Nile; and among birds, the vulpanser.

[Illustration: SPEARING THE CROCODILE.]

There is also another sacred bird, called the phnix, which I have never
seen except in a picture; for it makes its appearance amongst them only
once in five hundred years, as the Heliopolitans affirm: they say that
it comes on the death of its sire. If he is like the picture, he is of
the following size and description: the plumage of his wings is partly
golden-colored, and partly red; in outline and size he is like an eagle.
They tell this incredible story about him:They say that he comes from
Arabia, and brings the body of his father, enclosed in myrrh, to the
temple of the sun, and there buries him in the temple. He brings him in
this manner: first he moulds an egg of myrrh as large as he thinks
himself able to carry; then he tries to carry it, and when he has made
the experiment, he hollows out the egg, puts his parent into it, and
stops up with some more myrrh the hole through which he introduced the
body, so when his father is put inside, the weight is the same as
before; then he carries him to the temple of the sun in Egypt.

In the neighborhood of Thebes there are sacred serpents not at all
hurtful to men: they are diminutive in size, and carry two horns that
grow on the top of the head. When these serpents die they bury them in
the temple of Jupiter, for they say they are sacred to that God. There
is a place in Arabia, situated very near the city of Buto, to which I
went, on hearing of some winged serpents; there I saw bones and spines
of serpents in such quantities as it would be impossible to describe:
there were heaps upon heaps, some large, some smaller, scattered in a
narrow pass between two mountains, which leads into a spacious plain,
contiguous to the plain of Egypt: it is reported that at the beginning
of spring, winged serpents fly from Arabia toward Egypt; but that
ibises, a sort of bird, meet them at the pass, and do not allow the
serpents to go by, but kill them: for this service the Arabians say that
the ibis is highly reverenced by the Egyptians; and the Egyptians
acknowledge it. The ibis is all over a deep black; it has the legs of a
crane, its beak is much curved, and it is about the size of the crex.
Such is the form of the black ones, that fight with the serpents. But
those that are best known, for there are two species, are bare on the
head and the whole neck, have white plumage, except on the head, the
throat, and the tips of the wings and extremity of the tail; in all
these parts they are of a deep black; in their legs and beak they are
like the other kind. The form of the serpent is like that of the
water-snake; but he has wings without feathers, and as like as possible
to the wings of a bat. This must suffice for the description of sacred
animals.

Of the Egyptians, those who inhabit that part of Egypt which is sown
with corn, cultivate the memory of past events more than any other
people, and are the best-informed men I ever met. Their manner of life
is this: They purge themselves every month for three days successively,
seeking to preserve health by emetics and clysters, for they suppose
that all diseases to which men are subject proceed from the food they
use. And indeed in other respects the Egyptians, next to the Libyans,
are the most healthy people in the world, as I think, on account of the
seasons, because they are not liable to change; for men are most subject
to disease at periods of change, and above all others at the change of
the seasons. They feed on bread made into loaves of spelt, which they
call cyllestis; and they use wine made of barley, for they have no vines
in that country. Some fish they dry in the sun and eat raw, others
salted with brine; and of birds they eat quail, ducks, and smaller birds
raw, salting them first. All other things, whether birds or fishes, that
they have, except such as are accounted sacred, they eat either roasted
or boiled. At their convivial banquets, among the wealthy classes, when
they have finished supper, a man carries round in a coffin the image of
a dead body carved in wood, made as perfect a counterfeit as possible in
color and workmanship, and in size generally about one or two cubits in
length; and showing this to each of the company, he says: "Look upon
this, then drink and enjoy yourself; for when dead you will be like
this."

They observe their ancient customs and acquire no new ones. Among other
memorable customs they have just one song called "Linus," which is sung
in Phnicia, Cyprus, and elsewhere; in different nations it bears a
different name, but it agrees almost exactly with the same which the
Greeks sing, under the name of Linus. So that among the many wonderful
things in Egypt, the greatest wonder of all is where they got this
Linus; for they seem to have sung it from time immemorial. The "Linus"
in the Egyptian language is called Maneros; and the Egyptians say that
he was the only son of the first king of Egypt, and that happening to
die prematurely, he was honored by the Egyptians in this mourning dirge,
the first and only song they have. In the following particular the
Egyptians resemble the Lacedmonians only among all the Greeks: the
young men, when they meet their elders, give way and turn aside; and
rise from their seats when they approach. But, unlike any nation of the
Greeks, instead of addressing one another in the streets, they salute by
letting the hand fall down as far as the knee. They wear linen tunics
fringed round the legs, which they call calasiris, and over these they
throw white woollen mantles; woollen clothes, however, are not carried
into the temples, nor are they buried with them, as this is accounted
profaneagreeing in this respect with the worshippers of Orpheus and
Bacchus, who are Egyptians and Pythagoreans: for they consider it
profane for one who is initiated in these mysteries to be buried in
woollen garments for some religious reason or other. The Egyptians have
discovered more prodigies than all the rest of the world. They have
amongst them oracles of Hercules, Apollo, Minerva, Diana, Mars, and
Jupiter; but that which they honor above all others is the oracle of
Latona in the city of Buto. The art of medicine is divided amongst them
into specialties, each physician applying himself to one disease only.
All places abound in physicians, some for the eyes, others for the head,
others for the teeth, others for cutaneous diseases, and others still
for internal disorders.

Their manner of mourning and burying is as follows: When a man of any
consideration dies, all the women of that family besmear their heads and
faces with mud, leave the body in the house, and wander about the city,
beating themselves, having their clothes girt up, their neck and breast
exposed, and all their relations accompany them. The men, too, beat
themselves in the same way. When they have done this, they carry out the
body to be embalmed. There are persons who are specially appointed for
this purpose; when the dead body is brought to them, they show to the
bearers wooden models of corpses, skilfully painted to illustrate the
various methods of embalming. They first show the most expensive manner
of embalming; then the second, which is inferior and less expensive; and
lastly, the third and cheapest. The relations stipulate which style they
prefer, agree on the price, and depart. To embalm a body in the most
expensive manner, they first draw out the brains through the nostrils
with an iron hook, perfecting the operation by the infusion of drugs.
Then with a sharp Ethiopian stone they make an incision in the side, and
take out all the bowels; and having cleansed the abdomen and rinsed it
with palm-wine, they next sprinkle it with pounded perfumes. Then they
fill the belly with pure myrrh pounded, and cassia, and other perfumes,
frankincense excepted, and sew it up again; this done, they steep it in
natrum, leaving it under for seventy days; a longer time than which it
is not lawful to steep it. At the expiration of the seventy days they
wash the corpse, and wrap the whole body in bandages of flaxen cloth,
smearing it with gum, which the Egyptians commonly use instead of glue.
After this the relations take the body back again, make a wooden case in
the shape of a man, enclose the body in it, and store it in a sepulchral
chamber, setting it upright against the wall. For those who, to avoid
great expense, desire the middle way, they prepare in the following
manner. Charging syringes with oil made from cedar, they fill the
abdomen of the corpse without making any incision or taking out the
bowels, but inject it at the fundament; and having prevented the
injection from escaping, they steep the body in natrum for the
prescribed number of days, on the last of which they let out from the
abdomen the oil of cedar which has such power that it brings away the
intestines and vitals in a state of dissolution; the natrum dissolves
the flesh, and nothing of the body remains but the skin and the bones.
The operation is then complete. The third method of embalming, which is
used only for the poorer sort, consists in thoroughly rinsing the
abdomen in syrma, and steeping it with natrum for the seventy days.
Should any person, whether Egyptian or stranger, be found to have been
seized by a crocodile, or drowned in the river, to whatever city the
body may be carried, the inhabitants are by law compelled to have the
body embalmed, and adorned in the handsomest manner, and buried in the
sacred vaults. Nor is it lawful for any one else, whether relations or
friends, to touch him; but the priests of the Nile bury the corpse with
their own hands, as being something more than human.

They avoid using Grecian customs; and, in a word, the customs of all
other people whatsoever.

The Egyptians who dwell in the morasses, have the same customs as the
rest of the Egyptians, and each man has but one wife, like the Greeks.
But to obtain food more easily, they have the following inventions: when
the river is full, and has made the plains like a sea, great numbers of
lilies, which the Egyptians call lotus, spring up in the water: these
they gather and dry in the sun; then having pounded the middle of the
lotus, which resembles a poppy, they make bread of it and bake it. The
root also of this lotus is fit for food, and is tolerably sweet; it is
round, and of the size of an apple. There are also other lilies, like
roses, that grow in the river, the fruit of which is contained in a
separate pod, that springs up from the root in form very much like a
wasp's nest; in this there are many berries fit to be eaten, of the size
of an olive stone, and they are eaten both fresh and dried. The byblus,
an annual plant, is found in the fens. They cut off the top and put it
to some other uses, but the lower part that is left, to the length of a
cubit, they eat and sell. Those who are anxious to eat the byblus
dressed in the most delicate manner, stew it in a hot pan and then eat
it.

The Egyptians who live about the fens use an oil drawn from the fruit of
the sillicypria, which they call cici: they plant and cultivate these
sillicypria, which in Greece grow spontaneous and wild, on the banks of
the rivers and lakes: under cultivation these bear an abundance of
fruit, though of an offensive smell. Some bruise it and press out the
oil; others boil and stew it, and collect the liquid that flows from it;
this is fat, and no less suited for lamps than olive oil; but it emits a
disgusting smell. They contrive in various ways to protect themselves
from the mosquitoes, which are very abundant. Towers are of great
service to those who inhabit the upper parts of the marshes; for the
mosquitoes are prevented by the winds from flying high: but those who
live round the marshes have contrived another expedient. Every man has a
net, with which in the daytime he takes fish, and at night, in whatever
bed he sleeps, he throws the net around it, and crawls in underneath; if
he should wrap himself up in his clothes or in linen, the mosquitoes
would bite through them, but they never attempt to bite through the net.

Their ships in which they convey merchandise are made of the acacia,
which in shape is much like the Cyrenan lotus, and exudes a gum. From
this acacia they cut planks about two cubits in length and join them
together like bricks, building their ships in the following manner: They
fasten the planks of two cubits length round stout and long ties: when
they have thus built the hulls, they lay benches across them. They make
no use of ribs, but caulk the seams inside with byblus. They make only
one rudder, and that is driven through the keel. They use a mast of
acacia, and sails of byblus. These vessels are unable to sail up the
stream unless a fair wind prevails, but are towed from the shore. They
are thus carried down the stream: there is a hurdle made of tamarisk,
wattled with a band of reeds, and a stone with a hole in the middle, of
about two talents in weight; of these two, the hurdle is fastened to a
cable, and let down at the prow of the vessel to be carried on by the
stream; and the stone by another cable at the stern; and by this means
the hurdle, by the stream bearing hard upon it, moves quickly and draws
along "the baris" (for this is the name given to these vessels), but the
stone being dragged at the stern, and sunk to the bottom, keeps the
vessel in its course. They have very many of these vessels, and some of
them carry many thousand talents. When the Nile inundates the country,
the cities alone are seen above its surface, like the islands dotting
the gean Sea. When this happens, they navigate no longer by the channel
of the river, but straight across the country.




CHAPTER III.

GOD-KINGS PRIOR TO MENES.


In former time, the priests of Jupiter did to Hecatus the historian,
when he was tracing his own genealogy, and connecting his family with a
god in the sixteenth degree, the same as they did to me, though I did
not endeavor to trace my genealogy. Conducting me into the interior of a
spacious edifice, and showing me four hundred and forty-five wooden
colossuses, they counted them over; for every high-priest places an
image of himself there during his lifetime; the priests pointed out that
the succession from father to son was unbroken. But when Hecatus traced
his own genealogy, and connected himself with a god in the sixteenth
degree, they controverted his genealogy by computation, not admitting
that a man could be born from a god; and said that each of the
colossuses was a Piromis, sprung from a Piromis; until they pointed out
the three hundred and forty-five colossuses, each a Piromis, sprung from
a Piromis, and they did not connect them with any god or hero. Piromis
means, in the Grecian language, "a noble and good man." They said that
these were very far from being gods; but before the time of these men,
gods had been the rulers of Egypt, and had dwelt amongst men; and that
one of them always had the supreme power, and that Orus, the son of
Osiris, was the last who reigned over it. Now, Osiris in the Greek
language means Bacchus, and Orus is the equivalent of Apollo.

All the revenue from the city of Anthylla, which is of much importance,
is assigned to purchase shoes for the wife of the reigning king of Egypt.




CHAPTER IV.

FIRST LINE OF 330 KINGS, ONLY THREE MENTIONED.


The priests informed me, that Menes, who first ruled over Egypt, in the
first place protected Memphis by a mound; for the whole river formerly
ran close to the sandy mountain on the side of Libya; but Menes,
beginning about a hundred stades above Memphis, filled in the elbow
toward the south, dried up the old channel, and conducted the river into
a canal, so as to make it flow between the mountains. This bend of the
Nile is still carefully upheld by the Persians, and made secure every
year; for if the river should break through and overflow in this part,
there would be danger lest all Memphis should be flooded. When the part
cut off had been made firm land by this Menes, who was first king, he
built on it the city that is now called Memphis; and outside of it he
excavated a lake from the river toward the north and the west; for the
Nile itself bounds it toward the east. In the next place, they relate
that he built in it the temple of Vulcan, which is vast and well worthy
of mention. After this the priests enumerated from a book the names of
three hundred and thirty other kings. In so many generations of men,
there were eighteen Ethiopians and one native queen, the rest were
Egyptians. The name of this woman who reigned, was the same as that of
the Babylonian queen, Nitocris: they said that she avenged her brother,
whom the Egyptians had slain, while reigning over them. After they had
slain him, they delivered the kingdom to her; and she, to avenge him,
destroyed many of the Egyptians by this stratagem: she caused an
extensive apartment to be made underground, and pretended that she was
going to consecrate it, then inviting those of the Egyptians whom she
knew to have been principally concerned in the murder, she gave them a
great banquet, and in the midst of the feast let in the river upon them,
through a large concealed channel. Of the other kings they did not say
that they were in any respect renowned, except the last, Mris; he
accomplished some memorable works, as the portal of Vulcan's temple,
facing the north wind; and dug a lake, and built pyramids in it, the
size of which I shall mention when I come to speak of the lake itself.

[Illustration: HEAD OF RAMESES II.]




CHAPTER V.

FROM SESOSTRIS TO SETHON.


I shall next mention king Sesostris. The priests said that he was the
first who, setting out in ships of war from the Arabian Gulf, subdued
those nations that dwell by the Red Sea.

There are also in Ionia two images of this king, carved on rocks, one on
the way from Ephesia to Phoca, the other from Sardis to Smyrna. In both
places a man is carved, four cubits and a half high, holding a spear in
his right hand, and a bow in his left, and the rest of his equipment in
unison, for it is partly Egyptian and partly Ethiopian; from one
shoulder to the other across the breast extend sacred Egyptian
characters engraved, which have the following meaning: "I ACQUIRED
THIS REGION BY MY OWN SHOULDERS."

The priests tell a yarn of this Egyptian Sesostris, that returning and
bringing with him many men from the nations whose territories he had
subdued, when he arrived at the Pelusian Daphn, his brother, to whom he
had committed the government of Egypt, invited him to an entertainment,
and his sons with him, and caused wood to be piled up round the house
and set on fire: but that Sesostris, being informed of this, immediately
consulted with his wife, for he had taken his wife with him; she advised
him to extend two of his six sons across the fire, and form a bridge
over the burning mass, and that the rest should step on them and make
their escape. Sesostris did so, and two of his sons were in this manner
burned to death, but the rest, together with their father, were saved.
Sesostris having returned to Egypt, and taken revenge on his brother,
employed the multitude of prisoners whom he brought from the countries
he had subdued in many remarkable works: these were the men who drew the
huge stones which, in the time of this king, were conveyed to the temple
of Vulcan; they, too, were compelled to dig all the canals now seen in
Egypt; and thus by their involuntary labor made Egypt, which before was
throughout practicable for horses and carriages, unfit for these
purposes. But the king intersected the country with this network of
canals for the reason that such of the Egyptians as occupied the inland
cities, being in want of water when the river receded, were forced to
use a brackish beverage unfit to drink, which they drew from wells. They
said also that this king divided the country amongst all the Egyptians,
giving an equal square allotment to each; and thence drew his revenues
by requiring them to pay a fixed tax every year; if the river happened
to take away a part of any one's allotment, he was to come to him and
make known what had happened; whereupon the king sent persons to inspect
and measure how much the land was diminished, that in future he might
pay a proportionate part of the appointed tax. Land-measuring appears to
me to have had its beginning from this act, and to have passed over into
Greece; for the pole [12] and the sundial, and the division of the day
into twelve parts, the Greeks learned from the Babylonians. This king
was the only Egyptian that ever ruled over Ethiopia; he left as
memorials in front of Vulcan's temple statues of stone: two of thirty
cubits, of himself and his wife; and four, each of twenty cubits, of his
sons. A long time after, the priest of Vulcan would not suffer Darius
the Persian to place his statue before them, saying, "that deeds had not
been achieved by him equal to those of Sesostris the Egyptian: for
Sesostris had subdued other nations, not fewer than Darius had done, and
the Scythians besides; but that Darius was not able to conquer the
Scythians; wherefore it was not right for one who had not surpassed him
in achievements to place his statue before his offerings." They relate,
however, that Darius pardoned these observations.

[Illustration: BUST OF THOTHMES I.]

After the death of Sesostris, his son Pheron succeeded to the kingdom;
he undertook no military expedition, and happened to become blind
through the following occurrence: the river having risen to a very great
height for that time, eighteen cubits, it overflowed the fields, a storm
of wind arose, and the river was tossed about in waves; whereupon they
say that the king with great arrogance laid hold of a javelin, and threw
it into the midst of the eddies of the river; and that immediately
afterward he was seized with a pain in his eyes, and became blind. He
continued blind for ten years; but in the eleventh, having escaped from
this calamity, he dedicated offerings throughout all the celebrated
temples, the most worthy of mention being two stone obelisks to the
temple of the sun, each consisting of a single block of granite, and
each a hundred cubits in length and eight cubits in breadth.

A native of Memphis succeeded him in the kingdom, whose name in the
Grecian language is Proteus; there is to this day an enclosure sacred to
him at Memphis, which is very beautiful and richly adorned, situated to
the south side of the temple of Vulcan. The priests told me that when
Paris had carried Helen off from Sparta, violent winds drove him out of
his course in the gean into the Egyptian Sea, and from there (for the
gale did not abate) he came to Egypt, and in Egypt to that which is now
called the Canopic mouth of the Nile.

[Illustration: PARIS CARRYING AWAY HELEN.]

And Homer appears to me to have heard this relation; but as it was not
so well suited to epic poetry as the other which he has made use of, he
rejected it. He has told in the Iliad the wanderings of Paris; how,
while he was carrying off Helen, he was driven out of his course, and
wandered to other places, and how he arrived at Sidon of Phnicia; and
in the exploits of Diomede, his verses are as follows: "Where were the
variegated robes, works of Sidonian women, which god-like Paris himself
brought from Sidon, sailing over the wide sea, along the course by which
he conveyed high-born Helen."[13] He mentions it also in the Odyssey, in
the following lines: "Such well-chosen drugs had the daughter of Jove,
of excellent quality, which Polydamna gave her, the Egyptian wife of
Thonis, where the fruitful earth produces many drugs, many excellent
when mixed, and many noxious."[14] Menelaus also says the following to
Telemachus: "The gods detained me in Egypt, though anxious to return
hither, because I did not offer perfect hecatombs to them."[15] He shows
in these verses, that he was acquainted with the wandering of Paris in
Egypt; for Syria borders on Egypt, and the Phnicians, to whom Sidon
belongs, inhabit Syria. From these verses, and this first passage
especially, it is clear that Homer was not the author of the Cyprian
verses, but some other person. For in the Cyprian verses it is said,
that Paris reached Ilium from Sparta on the third day, when he carried
off Helen, having met with a favorable wind and a smooth sea; whereas
Homer in the Iliad says that he wandered far while taking her with him.

Rhampsinitus succeeded Proteus in the kingdom: He left as a monument the
portico of the temple of Vulcan, fronting to the west; and erected two
statues before the portico, twenty-five cubits high. Of these, the one
standing to the north the Egyptians call Summer; and that to the south,
Winter: and the one that they call Summer, they worship and do honor to;
but the one called Winter, they treat in a quite contrary way.

This king, they said, possessed a great quantity of money, such as no
one of the succeeding kings was able to attain. Wishing to treasure up
his wealth in safety, he built a chamber of stone, one of the walls of
which adjoined the outside of the palace. But the builder, forming a
plan against it, devised the following contrivance; he fitted one of the
stones so that it might be easily taken out by two men, or even one.
When the chamber was finished, the king laid up his treasures in it; in
the course of time the builder, finding his end approaching, called his
two sons to him, and described to them how he had provided when he was
building the king's treasury that they might have abundant sustenance;
and having clearly explained to them every thing relating to the removal
of the stone, he gave them its dimensions, and told them, if they would
observe his instructions, they would be stewards of the king's riches.
He died, and the sons were not long in applying themselves to the work;
coming by night to the palace, they found the stone in the building,
easily removed it, and carried off a great quantity of treasure. When
the king happened to open the chamber, he was astonished at seeing the
vessels deficient in treasure; but was not able to accuse any one, as
the seals were unbroken, and the chamber well secured. When on opening
it two or three times, the treasures were always evidently diminished
(for the thieves did not cease plundering), he adopted the following
plan: he ordered traps to be made, and placed them round the vessels in
which the treasures were. But when the thieves came as before, and one
of them had entered, as soon as he went near a vessel, he was
straightway caught in the trap; perceiving, therefore, in what a
predicament he was, he immediately called to his brother, and told him
what had happened, and bade him enter as quick as possible, and cut off
his head, lest, if he was seen and recognized, he should ruin him also:
the other thought that he spoke well, and did as he was advised; then,
having fitted in the stone, he returned home, taking with him his
brother's head. When day came, the king entered the chamber, and was
astonished at seeing the body of the thief in the trap without the head,
but the chamber secure, and without any means of entrance or exit. In
this perplexity he contrived another plan: he hung up the body of the
thief on a public wall, and having placed sentinels there, ordered them
to seize and bring before him whomsoever they should see weeping or
expressing commiseration at the spectacle. The mother was greatly
grieved at the body being suspended, and coming to words with her
surviving son, commanded him, by any means he could, to contrive how he
might take down and bring away the corpse of his brother; and if he
should neglect to do so, she threatened to go to the king, and inform
him that he had the treasures. Having got some asses, and filled some
skins with wine, he put them on the asses, and then drove them along;
but when he came near the sentinels that guarded the suspended corpse,
he drew out two or three of the necks of the skins that hung down, and
loosened them; and, as the wine ran out, he beat his head, and cried out
aloud, as if he knew not to which of the asses he should turn first. The
sentinels, when they saw wine flowing in abundance, ran into the road,
with vessels in their hands, caught the wine that was being spilt,
thinking it all their own gain; but the man, feigning anger, railed
bitterly against them all; however, as the sentinels soothed him, he at
length pretended to be pacified; and at last drove his asses out of the
road, and set them to rights again. When more conversation passed, and
one of the sentinels joked with him and set him laughing, he gave them
another of the skins; and they, just as they were, lay down and set to
to drink, and invited him to stay and drink with them. He was persuaded,
and remained with them; and as they treated him kindly during the
drinking, he gave them another of the skins; and the sentinels, having
taken very copious draughts, became royally drunk, and, overpowered by
the wine, fell asleep on the spot. Then he took down the body of his
brother, and having by way of insult shaved the right cheeks of all the
sentinels, laid the corpse on the asses, and drove home, having
performed his mother's injunctions. The king, upon being informed that
the body of the thief had been stolen, was exceedingly indignant, but
being unable by any means to find out the contriver of this artifice, he
grew so astonished at the shrewdness and daring of the man, that at
last, sending throughout all the cities, he caused a proclamation to be
made, offering a free pardon, and promising great reward to the man, if
he would discover himself. The thief, relying on this promise, went to
the king's palace; and Rhampsinitus greatly admired him, and gave him
his daughter in marriage, accounting him the most knowing of all men;
for while the Egyptians were superior to all others, he was superior to
the Egyptians.

After this, they said that this king descended alive into the place
which the Greeks call Hades, and there played at dice with Ceres, and
sometimes won, and other times lost; and that he came up again and
brought with him as a present from her a napkin of gold. Any person to
whom such things appear credible may adopt the accounts given by the
Egyptians; it is my object, however, throughout the whole history, to
write what I hear from each people. The Egyptians say that Ceres and
Bacchus hold the chief sway in the infernal regions; and the Egyptians
were also the first who asserted the doctrine that the soul of man is
immortal, and that when the body perishes the soul enters into some
other animal, constantly springing into existence; and when it has
passed through the different kinds of terrestrial, marine, and arial
beings, it again enters into the body of a man that is born; and that
this revolution is made in three thousand years.

[Illustration: BES AND HI.]

Now, they told me that down to the reign of Rhampsinitus there was a
perfect distribution of justice, and that all Egypt was in a high state
of prosperity; but that after him Cheops, coming to reign over them,
plunged into every kind of wickedness. For, having shut up all the
temples, he first of all forbade them to offer sacrifice, and afterward
ordered all the Egyptians to work for him; some, accordingly, were
appointed to draw stones from the quarries in the Arabian mountain down
to the Nile, others he ordered to receive the stones when transported in
vessels across the river, and to drag them to the mountain called the
Libyan. And they worked to the number of a hundred thousand men at a
time, each party during three months. The time during which the people
were thus harassed by toil lasted ten years on the road which they
constructed, along which they drew the stones, a work, in my opinion,
not much less than the pyramid: for its length is five stades, and its
width ten orgy, and its height, where it is the highest, eight orgy;
and it is of polished stone, with figures carved on it: ten years, then,
were expended on this road, and in forming the subterraneous apartments
on the hill, on which the pyramids stand, which he had made as a burial
vault for himself, in an island, formed by draining a canal from the
Nile. Twenty years were spent in erecting the pyramid itself: of this,
which is square, each face is eight plethra, and the height is the same;
it is composed of polished stones, and joined with the greatest
exactness; none of the stones are less than thirty feet in length. This
pyramid was built in the form of steps, which some call crosss, others
bomides. When they had first built it in this manner, they raised the
stones for covering the surface by machines made of short pieces of
wood: having lifted them from the ground to the first range of steps,
when the stone arrived there it was put on another machine that stood
ready on the first range; from this it was drawn to the second range on
another machine; for the machines were equal in number to the ranges of
steps; or they removed the machine, which was only one, and portable, to
each range in succession, whenever they wished to raise the stone
higher; for I should relate it in both ways, as it was related to me.
The highest parts of it were first finished, and last of all the parts
on the ground. On the pyramid is shown an inscription, in Egyptian
characters, how much was expended in radishes, onions, and garlic for
the workmen; which the interpreter, as I well remember, reading the
inscription, told me amounted to one thousand six hundred talents of
silver. If this be really the case, how much more was probably expended
in iron tools, in bread, and in clothes for the laborers, since they
occupied in building the works the time which I mentioned, and no short
time besides, as I think, in cutting and drawing the stones, and in
forming the subterraneous excavation. It is related that Cheops in his
cruelty subjected his daughter to every sort of disgrace, but she
contrived to leave a monument of herself, and asked every one that she
met to give her a stone toward the edifice she designed: of these stones
they said the pyramid was built that stands in the middle of the three,
before the great pyramid, each side of which is a plethron and a half in
length. The Egyptians say that this Cheops reigned fifty years; and when
he died, his brother Chephren succeeded to the kingdom; and he followed
the same practices as the other, both in other respects, and in building
a pyramid. This does not come up to the dimensions of his brother's, for
I myself measured them; nor has it subterraneous chambers; nor does a
channel from the Nile flow to it, as to the other; but this flows
through an artificial aqueduct round an island within, in which they say
the body of Cheops is laid. Having laid the first course of variegated
Ethiopian stones, less in height than the other by forty feet, he built
it near the large pyramid. They both stand on the same hill, which is
about a hundred feet high. Chephren, they said, reigned fifty-six years.
Thus one hundred and six years are reckoned, during which the Egyptians
suffered all kinds of calamities, and for this length of time the
temples were never opened. From the hatred they bear them the Egyptians
are not very willing to mention their names; but call the pyramids after
Philition, a shepherd, who at that time kept his cattle in those parts.

[Illustration: THE GREAT PYRAMID, WITHOUT THE SURFACE STONE.]

They said that after him, Mycerinus, son of Cheops, reigned over Egypt;
that the conduct of his father was displeasing to him; and that he
opened the temples, and permitted the people, who were worn down to the
last extremity, to return to their employments, and to sacrifices; and
that he made the most just decisions of all their kings. On this
account, of all the kings that ever reigned in Egypt, they praise him
most, for he both judged well in other respects, and moreover, when any
man complained of his decision, he used to make him some present out of
his own treasury and pacify his anger. To this beneficent Mycerinus, the
beginning of misfortunes was the death of his daughter, who was his only
child; whereupon he, extremely afflicted, and wishing to bury her in a
more costly manner than usual, caused a hollow wooden image of a cow to
be made and covered with gold, into which he put the body of his
deceased daughter. This cow was not interred in the ground, but even in
my time was exposed to view in the city of Sais, placed in the royal
palace, in a richly furnished chamber. They burn near it all kinds of
aromatics every day, and a lamp is kept burning by it throughout each
night.

The cow is covered with a purple cloth, except the head and the neck,
which are overlaid with very thick gold; and the orb of the sun imitated
in gold is placed between the horns. The cow is kneeling; in size equal
to a large, living cow.

[Illustration: SECTION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.]

After the loss of his daughter, a second calamity befell this king: an
oracle reached him from the city of Buto, importing, "that he had no
more than six years to live, and should die in the seventh." Thinking
this very hard, he sent a reproachful message to the god, complaining,
"that his father and uncle, who had shut up the temples, and paid no
regard to the gods, and moreover had oppressed men, had lived long;
whereas he who was religious must die so soon." But a second message
came to him from the oracle, stating, "that for this very reason his
life was shortened, because he had not done what he ought to have done;
for it was needful that Egypt should be afflicted during one hundred and
fifty years; and the two who were kings before him understood this, but
he did not." When Mycerinus heard this, and saw that this sentence was
now pronounced against him, he ordered a great number of lamps to be
made, which were lighted whenever night came on, and he drank and
enjoyed himself, never ceasing night or day, roving about the marshes
and groves, wherever he could hear of places most suited for pleasure.
He had recourse to this artifice for the purpose of convicting the
oracle of falsehood, that by turning the nights into days, he might have
twelve years instead of six.

This king also left a pyramid, but much smaller than that of his father,
being on each side twenty feet short of three plethra; it is
quadrangular, and built half way up of Ethiopian stone.

After Mycerinus, the priests said, that Asychis became king of Egypt,
and that he built the eastern portico to the temple of Vulcan, which is
by far the largest and most beautiful in its wealth of sculptured
figures and infinite variety of architecture. This king, being desirous
of surpassing his predecessors, left a pyramid, as a memorial, made of
bricks; on which is an inscription carved on stone, in the following
words: "Do not despise me in comparison with the pyramids of stone, for
I excel them as much as Jupiter, the other gods. For by plunging a pole
into a lake, and collecting the mire that stuck to the pole, men made
bricks, and in this manner built me."

[Illustration: SECTION OF GALLERY IN PYRAMID.]

After him there reigned a blind man of the city of Anysis, whose name
was Anysis. During his reign, the Ethiopians and their king, Sabacon,
invaded Egypt with a large force; whereupon this blind king fled to the
fens; and the Ethiopian reigned over Egypt for fifty years, during which
time he performed the following actions: When any Egyptians committed
any crime, he would not have any of them put to death, but passed
sentence upon each according to the magnitude of his offence, enjoining
them to heap up mounds of earth, each offender against his own city, and
by this means the cities were made much higher; for first of all they
had been raised considerably by those who dug the canals in the time of
king Sesostris. Although other cities in Egypt were carried to a great
height, in my opinion the greatest mounds were thrown up about the city
of Bubastis, in which is a beautiful temple of Bubastis corresponding to
the Grecian Diana. Her sacred precinct is thus situated: all except the
entrance is an island; for two canals from the Nile extend to it, not
mingling with each other, but each reaches as far as the entrance to the
precinct, one flowing round it on one side, the other on the other. Each
is a hundred feet broad, and shaded with trees. The portico is ten orgy
in height, and is adorned with figures six cubits high, that are
deserving of notice. This precinct, being in the middle of the city, is
visible on every side to a person going round it; for while the city has
been mounded up to a considerable height, the temple has not been moved,
so that it is conspicuous as it was originally built. A wall sculptured
with figures runs round it; and within is a grove of lofty trees,
planted round a large temple in which the image is placed. The width and
length of the precinct is each way a stade. Along the entrance is a road
paved with stone, four plethra in width and about three stades in
length, leading through the square eastward toward the temple of
Mercury; on each side of the road grow trees of enormous height. They
told me that the final departure of the Ethiopian occurred in the
following manner: it appeared to him in a vision that a man, standing by
him, advised him to assemble all the priests in Egypt, and to cut them
in two down the middle; but he, fearing that the gods held out this as a
pretext to him, in order that he, having been guilty of impiety in
reference to sacred things, might draw down some evil on himself from
gods or from men, would not do so; but as the time had expired during
which it was foretold that he should reign over Egypt, he departed
hastily from the country. When Sabacon of his own accord had departed
from Egypt, the blind king resumed the government, having returned from
the fens, where he had lived fifty years, on an island formed of ashes
and earth. For when any of the Egyptians came to him bringing
provisions, as they were severally ordered to do unknown to the
Ethiopian, he bade them bring some ashes also as a present. The kings
who preceded Amyrtus were unable, for more than seven hundred years, to
find out where this island was. It was called Elbo, and was about ten
stades square.

After him reigned a priest of Vulcan, whose name was Sethon: he held in
no account the military caste of the Egyptians, as not having need of
their services; and accordingly, among other indignities, he took away
their lands; to each of whom, under former kings, twelve chosen acres
had been assigned. After this, when Sennacherib, king of the Arabians
and Assyrians, marched a large army against Egypt, the Egyptian warriors
refused to assist him; and the priest, being reduced to a strait,
entered the temple, and bewailed before the image the calamities he was
in danger of suffering. While he was lamenting, sleep fell upon him, and
it appeared to him in a vision, that the god stood by and encouraged
him, assuring him that he should suffer nothing disagreeable in meeting
the Arabian army, for he would himself send assistants to him. Confiding
in this vision, he took with him such of the Egyptians as were willing
to follow him, and encamped in Pelusium, at the entrance into Egypt; but
none of the military caste followed him, only tradesmen, mechanics, and
sutlers. When they arrived there, a number of field mice, pouring in
upon their enemies, devoured their quivers and their bows, and the
handles of their shields; so that on the next day, when they fled bereft
of their arms, many of them fell. And to this day, a stone statue of
this king stands in the temple of Vulcan, with a mouse in his hand, and
an inscription to the following effect: "Whoever looks on me, let him
revere the gods."

[Illustration: HALL OF COLUMNS IN THE GREAT TEMPLE OF KARNAK.]

The Egyptians and the priests show that from the first king to this
priest of Vulcan who last reigned, were three hundred and forty-one
generations of men; and the same number of chief priests and kings. Now,
three hundred generations are equal to ten thousand years, for three
generations of men are one hundred years; and the forty-one remaining
generations that were over the three hundred, make one thousand three
hundred and forty years. Thus, they say, in eleven thousand three
hundred and forty years, no god has assumed the form of a man. They
relate that during this time the sun has four times risen out of his
usual quarter, and that he has twice risen where he now sets, and twice
set where he now rises; yet, that no change in the things in Egypt was
occasioned by this, either in respect to the productions of the earth or
the river, or to diseases or deaths.




CHAPTER VI.

THIRD LINE; FROM THE TWELVE KINGS TO AMASIS.


What things both other men and the Egyptians agree in saying occurred in
this country, I shall now proceed to relate, and shall add to them some
things of my own observation. The Egyptians having become free, after
the reign of the priest of Vulcan, since they were at no time able to
live without a king, divided all Egypt into twelve parts and established
twelve others. These contracted intermarriages, and agreed that they
would not attempt the subversion of one another, and would maintain the
strictest friendship. They made these regulations and strictly upheld
them, for the reason that it had been foretold them by an oracle when
they first assumed the government, "that whoever among them should offer
a libation in the temple of Vulcan from a bronze bowl, should be king of
all Egypt"; for they used to assemble in all the temples. Now, being
determined to leave in common a memorial of themselves, they built a
labyrinth, a little above the lake of Mris, situated near that called
the city of Crocodiles; this I have myself seen, and found it greater
than can be described. For if any one should reckon up all the buildings
and public works of the Greeks, they would be found to have cost less
labor and expense than this labyrinth alone, though the temple in
Ephesus is deserving of mention, and also that in Samos. The pyramids
likewise were beyond description, and each of them comparable to many of
the great Greek structures. Yet the labyrinth surpasses even the
pyramids. For it has twelve courts enclosed with walls, with doors
opposite each other, six facing the north, and six the south, contiguous
to one another; and the same exterior wall encloses them. It contains
two kinds of rooms, some under ground and some above, to the number of
three thousand, fifteen hundred of each. The rooms above ground I myself
went through and saw, and relate from personal inspection. But the
underground rooms I know only from report; for the Egyptians who have
charge of the building would, on no account, show me them, saying that
they held the sepulchres of the kings who originally built this
labyrinth, and of the sacred crocodiles. I can therefore only relate
what I have learnt by hearsay concerning the lower rooms; but the upper
ones, which surpass all human works, I myself saw. The passages through
the corridors, and the windings through the courts, from their great
variety, presented a thousand occasions of wonder, as I passed from a
court to the rooms, and from the rooms to halls, and to other corridors
from the halls, and to other courts from the rooms. The roofs of all
these are of stone, as also are the walls; but the walls are full of
sculptured figures. Each court is surrounded with a colonnade of white
stone, closely fitted. And adjoining the extremity of the labyrinth is a
pyramid, forty orgy in height, on which large figures are carved, and a
way to it has been made under ground.

Yet more wonderful than this labyrinth is the lake named from Mris,
near which this labyrinth is built; its circumference measures three
thousand six hundred stades, or a distance equal to the sea-coast of
Egypt. The lake stretches lengthways, north and south, being in depth in
the deepest part fifty orgy. That it is made by hand and dry, this
circumstance proves, for about the middle of the lake stand two
pyramids, each rising fifty orgy above the surface of the water, and
the part built under water extends to an equal depth; on each of these
is placed a stone statue, seated on a throne. Thus these pyramids are
one hundred orgy in height. The water in this lake does not spring from
the soil, for these parts are excessively dry, but it is conveyed
through a channel from the Nile, and for six months it flows into the
lake, and six months out again into the Nile. And during the six months
that it flows out it yields a talent of silver every day to the king's
treasury from the fish; but when the water is flowing into it, twenty
min. The people of the country told me that this lake discharges itself
under ground into the Syrtis of Libya, running westward toward the
interior by the mountain above Memphis. But when I did not see anywhere
a heap of soil from this excavation, for this was an object of curiosity
to me, I inquired of the people who lived nearest the lake, where the
soil that had been dug out was to be found; they told me where it had
been carried, and easily persuaded me, because I had heard that a
similar thing had been done at Nineveh, in Assyria. For certain thieves
formed a design to carry away the treasures of Sardanapalus, King of
Nineveh, which were very large, and preserved in subterraneous
treasuries; the thieves, therefore, beginning from their own dwellings,
dug under ground by estimated measurement to the royal palace, and the
soil that was taken out of the excavations, when night came on, they
threw into the river Tigris, that flows by Nineveh; and so they
proceeded until they had effected their purpose. The same method I heard
was adopted in digging the lake in Egypt, except that it was not done by
night, but during the day; for the Egyptians who dug out the soil
carried it to the Nile, and the river receiving it, soon dispersed it.

[Illustration: EGYPTIAN BELL CAPITALS.]

[Illustration: HARPOON AND FISH HOOKS.]

While the twelve kings continued to observe justice, in course of time,
as they were sacrificing in the temple of Vulcan, and were about to
offer a libation on the last day of the festival, the high priest,
mistaking the number, brought out eleven of the twelve golden bowls with
which he used to make the libation. Whereupon he who stood last of them,
Psammitichus, since he had not a bowl, having taken off his helmet,
which was of bronze, held it out and made the libation. All the other
kings were in the habit of wearing helmets, and at that time had them
on. Psammitichus therefore, without any sinister intention, held out his
helmet; but they having taken into consideration what was done by
Psammitichus, and the oracle that had foretold to them, "that whoever
among them should offer a libation from a bronze bowl, should be sole
king of Egypt"; calling to mind the oracle, did not think it right to
put him to death, since upon examination they found that he had done it
by no premeditated design. But they determined to banish him to the
marshes, having divested him of the greatest part of his power; and they
forbade him to leave the marshes, or have any intercourse with the rest
of Egypt. With the design of avenging himself on his persecutors, he
sent to the city of Buto to consult the oracle of Latona, the truest
oracle that the Egyptians have, and the answer was returned "that
vengeance would come from the sea, when men of bronze should appear." He
was very incredulous that men of bronze would come to assist him; but
not long after a stress of weather compelled some Ionians and Carians,
who had sailed out for the purpose of piracy, to bear away to Egypt; and
when they had disembarked and were clad in bronze armor, an Egyptian,
who had never before seen men clad in such manner, went to the marshes
to Psammitichus, and told him that men of bronze had arrived from the
sea, and were ravaging the plains. He felt at once that the oracle was
accomplished, and treated these Ionians and Carians in a friendly
manner, and by promising them great things, persuaded them to join with
him; and, with their help and that of such Egyptians as were well
disposed toward him, he overcame the other kings.

[Illustration: EGYPTIAN HELMETS.]

Psammitichus, now master of all Egypt, constructed the portico to
Vulcan's temple at Memphis that faces the south wind; he built a court
for Apis, in which he is fed whenever he appears, opposite the portico,
surrounded by a colonnade, and full of sculptured figures; and instead
of pillars, statues twelve cubits high are placed under the piazza.
Apis, in the language of the Greeks, means Epaphus. To the Ionians, and
those who with them had assisted him, Psammitichus gave lands opposite
each other, with the Nile flowing between. These bear the name of
"Camps." He royally fulfilled all his promises; and he moreover put
Egyptian children under their care to be instructed in the Greek
language; from whom the present interpreters in Egypt are descended. The
Ionians and the Carians continued for a long time to inhabit these
lands, situated near the sea, a little below the city of Bubastis. They
were the first people of a different language who settled in Egypt. The
docks for their ships, and the ruins of their buildings, were to be seen
in my time in the places from which they had removed.

Psammitichus reigned in Egypt fifty-four years; during twenty-nine of
which he sat down before and besieged Azotus, a large city of Syria,
until he took it. This Azotus, of all the cities we know of, held out
against a siege the longest period. Neco was son of Psammitichus, and
became king of Egypt: he first set about the canal that leads to the Red
Sea, which Darius the Persian afterward completed. Its length is a
voyage of four days, and in width it was dug so that two triremes might
sail rowed abreast. The water is drawn into it from the Nile, and enters
it a little above the city Bubastis. The canal passes near the Arabian
city Patumos, and reaches to the Red Sea. In the digging of it one
hundred and twenty thousand Egyptians perished in the reign of Neco.

Psammis his son reigned only six years over Egypt. He made an expedition
into Ethiopia, and shortly afterward died, Apries his son succeeding to
the kingdom. He, next to his grandfather Psammitichus, enjoyed greater
prosperity than any of the former kings, during a reign of five and
twenty years, in which period he marched an army against Sidon, and
engaged the Tyrians by sea. But it was destined for him to meet with
adversity. For, having sent an army against the Cyrenans, he met with a
signal defeat. And the Egyptians, complaining of this, revolted from
him, suspecting that Apries had designedly sent them to certain ruin, in
order that they might be destroyed, and he might govern the rest of the
Egyptians with greater security. Both those that returned and the
friends of those who perished, being very indignant at this, openly
revolted against him. Apries, having heard of this, sent Amasis to
appease them by persuasion. But when he had come to them, and was urging
them to desist from their enterprise, one of the Egyptians, standing
behind him, placed a helmet on his head, and said: "I put this on you to
make you king." And this action was not at all disagreeable to Amasis,
as he presently showed. When Apries heard of this, he armed his
auxiliaries and marched against the Egyptians with Carian and Ionian
auxiliaries to the number of thirty thousand. They met near the city
Momemphis, and prepared to engage with each other. Apries had a palace
in the city of Sais that was spacious and magnificent.

There are seven classes of people among the Egyptianspriests, warriors,
herdsmen, swineherds, tradesmen, interpreters, and pilots. Their
warriors are called Calasiries or Hermotybies. The Hermotybies number,
when they are most numerous, a hundred and sixty thousand. None of these
learn any business or mechanical art, but apply themselves wholly to
military affairs. The Calasiries number two hundred and fifty thousand
men: nor are these allowed to practise any art, but they devote
themselves to military pursuits alone, the son succeeding to his father.

When Apries, leading his auxiliaries, and Amasis, all the Egyptians, met
together at Momemphis, the foreigners fought well, but being far
inferior in numbers, were, on that account, defeated. Apries is said to
have been of opinion that not even a god could deprive him of his
kingdom, so securely did he think himself established; but he was
beaten, taken prisoner, and carried back to Sais, to that which was
formerly his own palace, but which now belonged to Amasis: here he was
maintained for some time in the royal palace, and Amasis treated him
well. But at length the Egyptians complaining that he did not act
rightly in preserving a man who was the greatest enemy both to them and
to him, he delivered Apries to the Egyptians. They strangled him, and
buried him in his ancestral sepulchre, in the sacred precinct of
Minerva, very near the temple, on the left hand as you enter.

Apries being thus dethroned, Amasis, who was of the Saitic district,
reigned in his stead; the name of the city from which he came was Siuph.
At first the Egyptians held him in no great estimation, as having been
formerly a private person, and of no illustrious family; but afterward
he conciliated them by an act of address, without any arrogance. He had
an infinite number of treasures among them a golden foot-pan, in which
Amasis himself and all his guests were accustomed to wash their feet.
This he broke in pieces, had the statue of a god made from it, and
placed it in the most suitable part of the city. The Egyptians flocked
to the image and paid it the greatest reverence. Thus, Amasis called the
Egyptians together and said: "This statue was made out of the foot-pan
in which the Egyptians formerly spat and washed their feet, and which
they then so greatly reverenced; now, the same has happened to me as to
the foot-pan; for though I was before but a private person, I now am
your king; you must therefore honor and respect me." By this means he
won over the Egyptians, so that they thought fit to obey him. He adopted
the following method of managing his affairs: early in the morning,
until the time of full-market, he assiduously despatched the business
brought before him; after that he drank and jested with his companions,
and talked loosely and sportively. But his friends, offended at this,
admonished him, saying: "You do not, O king, control yourself properly,
in making yourself too common. For it becomes you, who sit on a
venerable throne, to pass the day in transacting public business; thus
the Egyptians would know that they are governed by a great man, and you
would be better spoken of. But now you act in a manner not at all
becoming a king." But he answered them: "They who have bows, when they
want to use them, bend them; but when they have done using them, they
unbend them; for if the bow were to be kept always bent, it would break.
Such is the condition of man; if he should incessantly attend to serious
business, and not give himself up sometimes to sport, he would shortly
become mad or stupefied. I, being well aware of this, give up a portion
of my time to each."

He built an admirable portico to the temple of Minerva at Sais, far
surpassing all others both in height and size, as well as in the
dimensions and quality of the stones; he likewise dedicated large
statues, and huge andro-sphinxes, and brought other stones of a
prodigious size for repairs: some from the quarries near Memphis; but
those of greatest magnitude, from the city of Elephantine, distant from
Sais a passage of twenty days. But that which I rather the most admire,
is this: he brought a building of one stone from the city of
Elephantine, and two thousand men, who were appointed to convey it, were
occupied three whole years in its transport, and these men were all
pilots. The length of this chamber, outside, is twenty-one cubits, the
breadth fourteen, and the height eight. But inside, the length is
eighteen cubits and twenty digits, the width twelve cubits, and the
height five cubits. This chamber is placed near the entrance of the
sacred precinct; for they say that he did not draw it within the
precinct for the following reason: the architect, as the chamber was
being drawn along, heaved a deep sigh, being wearied with the work, over
which so long a time had been spent; whereupon Amasis, making a
religious scruple of this, would not suffer it to be drawn any farther.
Some persons however say, that one of the men employed at the levers was
crushed to death by it, and that on that account it was not drawn into
the precinct. Amasis dedicated in all the most famous temples, works
admirable for their magnitude; and amongst them, at Memphis, the
reclining colossus before the temple of Vulcan, of which the length is
seventy-five feet; and on the same base stand two statues of Ethiopian
stone, each twenty feet in height, one on each side of the temple. There
is also at Sais another similar statue, lying in the same manner as that
at Memphis. It was Amasis also who built the temple to Isis at Memphis,
which is spacious and well worthy of notice.

[Illustration: THE GREAT SPHINX.]

Under the reign of Amasis, Egypt is said to have enjoyed the greatest
prosperity, both in respect to the benefits derived from the river to
the land, and from the land to the people; and it is said to have
contained at that time twenty thousand inhabited cities. Amasis it was
who established the law among the Egyptians, that every Egyptian should
annually declare to the governor of his district, by what means he
maintained himself; and if he failed to do this, or did not show that he
lived by honest means, he should be punished with death. Solon the
Athenian brought this law from Egypt and established it at Athens.
Amasis, being partial to the Greeks, bestowed other favors on various of
the Greeks, and gave the city of Naucratis for such as arrived in Egypt
to dwell in; and to such as did not wish to settle there, but only to
trade by sea, he granted places where they might erect altars and
temples to the gods. Now, the most spacious of these sacred buildings,
which is also the most renowned and frequented, called the Hellenium,
was erected at the common charge of the following cities: of the
Ionians,Chios, Teos, Phoca, and Clazomen; of the Dorians,Rhodes,
Cnidus, Halicarnassus, Phaselis; and of the olians,Mitylene alone. So
that this temple belongs to them, and these cities appoint officers to
preside over the mart: and whatever other cities claim a share in it,
claim what does not belong to them. Besides this, the people of gina
built a temple to Jupiter for themselves; and the Samians another to
Juno, and the Milesians one to Apollo. Naucratis was anciently the only
place of resort for merchants, and there was no other in Egypt: and if a
man arrived at any other mouth of the Nile, he was obliged to swear
"that he had come there against his will"; and having taken such an
oath, he must sail in the same ship to the Canopic mouth; but if he
should be prevented by contrary winds from doing so, he was forced to
unload his goods and carry them in barges round the Delta until he
reached Naucratis. So great were the privileges of Naucratis. When the
Amphyctions contracted to build the temple that now stands at Delphi for
three hundred talentsfor the temple that was formerly there had been
burned by accident, and it fell upon the Delphians to supply a fourth
part of the sumthe Delphians went about from city to city to solicit
contributions, and brought home no small amount from Egypt. For Amasis
gave them a thousand talents of alum, and the Greeks who were settled in
Egypt twenty min.

Amasis also dedicated offerings in Greece. In the first place, a gilded
statue of Minerva at Cyrene, and his own portrait painted; secondly, to
Minerva in Lindus two stone statues and a linen corselet well worthy of
notice; thirdly, to Juno at Samos two images of himself carved in wood,
which stood in the large temple even in my time, behind the doors. He
was the first who conquered Cyprus, and subjected it to the payment of
tribute.

[12] By the Greek word  Herodotus means "a concave dial," shaped
like the vault of heaven.

[13] Iliad, vi., 289.

[14] Odyssey, iv., 227.

[15] Odyssey, iv., 351.




_BOOK III. THALIA._




CHAPTER I.

EXPEDITIONS OF CAMBYSES.


Cambyses, son of Cyrus, made war against Amasis, leading with him his
own subjects, together with Greeks, Ionians and olians. The cause of
the war was this: Cambyses sent a herald into Egypt to demand the
daughter of Amasis. The suggestion was made by an Egyptian physician,
who out of spite served Amasis in this manner, because Amasis had
selected him out of all the physicians in Egypt, torn him from his wife
and children, and sent him as a present to the Persians, when Cyrus had
sent to Amasis, and required of him the best oculist in Egypt. The
Egyptian therefore, having this spite against him, urged on Cambyses by
his suggestions, bidding him demand the daughter of Amasis, in order
that if he should comply he might be grieved, or if he refused he might
incur the hatred of Cambyses. But Amasis, dreading the power of the
Persians, resorted to a piece of deceit. There was a daughter of Apries,
the former king, very tall and beautiful, the only survivor of the
family, named Nitetis. This damsel, Amasis adorned with cloth of gold,
and sent to Persia as his own daughter. After a time, when Cambyses
saluted her, addressing her by her father's name, the damsel said to
him: "O king, you do not perceive that you have been imposed upon by
Amasis, who dressed me in rich attire, and sent me to you, presenting me
as his own daughter; whereas, I am really the daughter of Apries, whom
he put to death, after he had incited the Egyptians to revolt." These
words enraged Cambyses, and led him to invade Egypt.

[Illustration: EGYPTIAN POTTERY.]

A circumstance that few of those who have made voyages to Egypt have
noticed, I shall now proceed to mention. From every part of Greece, and
also from Phnicia, earthen vessels filled with wine are imported into
Egypt twice every year, and yet not a single one of these wine jars is
afterward to be seen. In what way, then, you may ask, are they disposed
of? Every magistrate is obliged to collect all the vessels from his own
city, and send them to Memphis; the people of that city fill them with
water, and convey them to the arid parts of Syria; so that the earthen
vessels continually imported and landed in Egypt, are added to those
already in Syria. The Persians, as soon as they became masters of Egypt,
facilitated the passage into that country, by supplying it with water in
this manner. But as, at that time, water was not provided, Cambyses, by
the advice of a Halicarnassian stranger, sent ambassadors to the
Arabian, and requested a safe passage, which he obtained, giving to, and
receiving from him, pledges of faith.

The Arabians observe pledges as religiously as any people: when any wish
to pledge their faith, a third person, standing between the two parties,
makes an incision with a sharp stone in the palm of the hand, near the
longest fingers, of both the contractors; then taking some of the nap
from the garment of each, he smears seven stones, placed between them,
with the blood; and as he does this, he invokes Bacchus and Urania. When
this ceremony is completed, the person who pledges his faith, binds his
friends as sureties to the stranger, or the citizen, if the contract be
made with a citizen, and the friends also hold themselves obliged to
observe the engagement. They acknowledge no other gods than Bacchus and
Urania, and they say that their hair is cut in the same way as Bacchus'
is cut, in a circular form, banged round the temples. They call Bacchus,
Orotal; and Urania, Alilat. When the Arabian had exchanged pledges with
the ambassadors who came from Cambyses, he filled camels' skins with
water, loaded them on all his living camels, and drove them to the arid
region, and there awaited the army of Cambyses. This is the most
credible of the accounts that are given; yet it is right that one less
credible should be mentioned, since it is likewise affirmed. There is a
large river in Arabia called Corys, which discharges itself into the Red
Sea. From this river it is said that the king of the Arabians, having
sewn together a pipe of ox-hides and other skins, reaching in length to
the desert, conveyed the water through it; and that in the arid region
he dug large reservoirs, to receive and preserve the water. It is a
twelve days' journey from the river to the desert, yet he conveyed water
through three pipes into three different places.

Amasis died after a reign of forty-four years, during which no great
calamity had befallen him. He was embalmed and buried in the sepulchre
within the sacred precinct, which he himself had built. During the reign
of Psammenitus, son of Amasis, a most remarkable prodigy befell the
Egyptians; rain fell at Egyptian Thebes, which had never happened
before, nor since, to my time, as the Thebans themselves affirm. For no
rain ever falls in the upper regions of Egypt; but at that time rain
fell in drops at Thebes. The Persians, having marched through the arid
region, halted near the Egyptians, as if with a design of engaging;
there the auxiliaries of the Egyptians, consisting of Greeks and
Carians, condemning Phanes because he had led a foreign army against
Egypt, adopted the following expedient against him: Phanes had left his
sons in Egypt; these they brought to the camp, within sight of their
father, placed a bowl midway between the two armies, then dragging the
children one by one, they slew them over the bowl, into which they also
poured wine and water; then all the auxiliaries drank of the blood, and
immediately joined battle. After a hard fight, when great numbers had
fallen on both sides, the Egyptians were put to flight. Here I saw a
very surprising fact, of which the people of the country informed me. As
the bones of those who were killed in that battle lie scattered about
separately, the bones of the Persians in one place, and those of the
Egyptians in another, the skulls of the Persians were so weak that if
you should hit one with a single pebble, you would break a hole in it;
whereas those of the Egyptians are so hard, that you could scarcely
fracture them by striking them with a stone. The cause of this, they
told me (and I readily assented), is that the Egyptians begin from
childhood to shave their heads, and the bone is thickened by exposure to
the sun; from the same cause also they are less subject to baldness, and
one sees fewer persons bald in Egypt than in any other country. But the
Persians have weak skulls, because they shade them from the first,
wearing tiaras for hats.

The Egyptians fled in complete disorder from the battle. When they had
shut themselves up in Memphis, Cambyses sent a Mitylenan bark up the
river, with a Persian herald on board, to invite the Egyptians to terms.
But when they saw the bark entering Memphis they rushed in a mass from
the wall, destroyed the ship, and having torn the crew to pieces, limb
by limb, they carried them into the citadel. After this the Egyptians
were besieged, and at length surrounded. The neighboring Libyans,
fearing what had befallen Egypt, gave themselves up without resistance,
submitted to pay a tribute, and sent presents, which Cambyses received
very graciously.

On the tenth day after Cambyses had taken the citadel of Memphis, he
seated Psammenitus, the King of the Egyptians, who had reigned only six
months, at the entrance of the city. And by way of insult, he dressed
his daughter in the habit of a slave, and sent her with a pitcher to
fetch water, with other maidens selected from the principal families,
dressed in the same manner. As the girls, with loud lamentation and
weeping, came into the presence of their fathers, all the other fathers
answered them with wailing and weeping, when they beheld their children
thus humiliated. But Psammenitus only bent his eyes to the ground. When
these water-carriers had passed by, he next sent his son, with two
thousand Egyptians of the same age, with halters about their necks, and
a bridle in their mouths; and they were led out to suffer retribution
for those Mitylenans who had perished at Memphis with the ship. For the
royal judges had given sentence, that for each man ten of the principal
Egyptians should be put to death. Yet, when he saw them passing by, and
knew that his son was being led out to death, though all the rest of the
Egyptians who sat round him wept and made loud lamentations, he did the
same as he had done in his daughter's case. But just then it happened
that one of his boon-companions, a man somewhat advanced in years, who
had lost his all, and possessed nothing but such things as a beggar has,
asking alms of the soldiery, passed by Psammenitus, and the Egyptians
seated in the suburbs. Then, indeed, he wept bitterly, and calling his
companion by name, smote his head. Cambyses, surprised at this behavior,
sent a messenger to say: "Psammenitus, your master Cambyses inquires
why, when you saw your daughter humiliated and your son led to
execution, you did not bewail or lament; and have been so highly
concerned for a beggar, who is no way related to you, as he is
informed." Psammenitus answered: "Son of Cyrus, the calamities of my
family are too great to be expressed by lamentation; but the griefs of
my friend were worthy of tears, who, having fallen from abundance and
prosperity, has come to beggary on the threshold of old age." When this
answer was brought back by the messenger, it appeared to Cambyses to be
well said; and, as the Egyptians relate, Crsus wept, for he had
attended Cambyses into Egypt, and the Persians that were present wept
also; Cambyses himself, touched with pity, gave immediate orders to
preserve his son out of those who were to perish, but those who were
sent found the son no longer alive, having been the first that suffered;
but Psammenitus himself they conducted to Cambyses, with whom he
afterward lived, without experiencing any violence. And had it not been
suspected that he was planning innovations, he would probably have
recovered Egypt, so as to have the government intrusted to him. For the
Persians are accustomed to honor the sons of kings, and even if they
have revolted from them, sometimes bestow the government upon their
children. Psammenitus, devising mischief, received his reward, for he
was discovered inciting the Egyptians to revolt; and when he was
detected by Cambyses he was compelled to drink the blood of a bull, and
died immediately.

Cambyses proceeded from Memphis to the city of Sais, and entering the
palace of Amasis, commanded the dead body of Amasis to be brought out of
the sepulchre; he gave orders then to scourge it, to pull off the hair,
to prick it, and to abuse it in every possible manner. But when they
were wearied with this employment, for the dead body, since it was
embalmed, resisted, and did not at all fall in pieces, Cambyses gave
orders to burn it, commanding what is impious. For to burn the dead is
on no account allowed by either nation: not by the Persians, for they
consider fire to be a god, and say it is not right to offer to a god the
dead body of a man; nor by the Egyptians, as fire is held by them to be
a living beast, which devours every thing it can lay hold of, and when
it is glutted with food it expires with what it has consumed; therefore,
as it is their law on no account to give a dead body to wild beasts, for
that reason they embalm them, that they may not lie and be eaten by
worms.

Cambyses determined to send to Elephantine for some of the Ichthyophagi,
who understood the Ethiopian language, that he might despatch them as
spies to Ethiopia. When the Ichthyophagi came, he despatched them to the
Ethiopians, having instructed them what to say, carrying presents,
consisting of a purple cloak, a golden necklace, bracelets, an alabaster
box of ointment, and a cask of palm wine. These Ethiopians, to whom
Cambyses sent, are said to be the tallest and handsomest of all men; and
have customs different from those of other nations, especially with
regard to the regal power; for they confer the sovereignty upon the man
whom they consider to be of the largest stature, and to possess strength
proportionate to his size.

When the Ichthyophagi arrived among this people, they gave the presents
to the king, and addressed him as follows: "Cambyses, King of the
Persians, desirous of becoming your friend and ally, has sent us to
confer with you, and he presents you with these gifts, which are such as
he himself most delights in." But the Ethiopian, knowing that they came
as spies, spoke thus to them: "Neither has the king of the Persians sent
you with presents to me, because he valued my alliance; nor do you speak
the truth; for ye are come as spies of my kingdom. Nor is he a just man;
for if he were just, he would not desire any other territory than his
own; nor would he reduce people into servitude who have done him no
injury. However, give him this bow, and say these words to him: 'The
king of the Ethiopians advises the king of the Persians, when the
Persians can thus easily draw a bow of this size, then to make war on
the Macrobian Ethiopians with more numerous forces; but until that time
let him thank the gods, who have not inspired the sons of the Ethiopians
with a desire of adding another land to their own.'" Having spoken thus
and unstrung the bow, he delivered it to the comers. Then taking up the
purple cloak, he asked what it was, and how made; and when the
Ichthyophagi told him the truth respecting the purple, and the manner of
dyeing, he said that the men are deceptive, and their garments are
deceptive also. Next he inquired about the necklace and bracelets, and
when the Ichthyophagi explained to him their use as ornaments, the king,
laughing, and supposing them to be fetters, said that they have stronger
fetters than these. Thirdly, he inquired about the ointment; and when
they told him about its composition and use, he made the same remark as
he had on the cloak. But when he came to the wine, and inquired how it
was made, being very much delighted with the draught, he further asked
what food the king made use of, and what was the longest age to which a
Persian lived. They answered, that he fed on bread, describing the
nature of wheat; and that the longest period of the life of a Persian
was eighty years. Upon this the Ethiopian said, that he was not at all
surprised if men who fed on earth lived so few years; and he was sure
they would not be able to live even so many years, if they did not
refresh themselves with this beverage, showing the wine to the
Ichthyophagi: for in this he admitted they were surpassed by the
Persians. The Ichthyophagi inquiring in turn of the king concerning the
life and diet of the Ethiopians, he said, that most of them attained to
a hundred and twenty years, and some even exceeded that term, and that
their food was boiled flesh, and their drink milk. When the spies
expressed their astonishment at the number of years, he led them to a
fountain, by washing in which they became more sleek, as if it had been
of oil, and an odor proceeded from it as of violets. The water of this
fountain, the spies said, is so weak, that nothing is able to float upon
it, neither wood, nor such things as are lighter than wood; but every
thing sinks to the bottom. If this water is truly such as it is said to
be, it may be they are long-lived by reason of the abundant use of it.
Leaving this fountain, he conducted them to the common prison, where all
were fettered with golden chains; for among these Ethiopians bronze is
the most rare and precious of all metals. After this, they visited last
of all their sepulchres, which are said to be prepared from crystal in
the following manner. When they have dried the body, either as the
Egyptians do, or in some other way, they plaster it all over with
gypsum, and paint it, making it as much as possible to resemble real
life; they then put round it a hollow column made of crystal, which they
dig up in abundance, and is easily wrought. The body being in the middle
of the column is plainly seen, and it does not emit an unpleasant smell,
nor is it in any way offensive; and it is all visible[16] as the body
itself. The nearest relations keep the column in their houses for a
year, offering to it the first-fruits of all, and performing sacrifices;
after that time they carry it out and place it somewhere near the city.

When the spies returned home and reported all that had passed, Cambyses,
in a great rage, immediately marched against the Ethiopians, without
making any provision for the subsistence of his army, or once
considering that he was going to carry his arms to the remotest parts of
the world; but, as a madman, and not in possession of his senses, as
soon as he heard the report of the Icthyophagi, he set out on his march,
ordering the Greeks who were present to stay behind, and taking with him
all his land forces. When the army reached Thebes, he detached about
fifty thousand men, and ordered them to reduce the Ammonians to slavery,
and to burn the oracular temple of Jupiter, while he with the rest of
his army marched against the Ethiopians. But before the army had passed
over a fifth part of the way, all the provisions that they had were
exhausted, and the beasts of burden themselves were eaten. Now if
Cambyses had at this juncture altered his purpose, and had led back his
army, he would have proved himself to be a wise man. But he obstinately
continued advancing. The soldiers supported life by eating herbs as long
as they could gather any from the ground; but when they reached the
sands, some of them had recourse to a dreadful expedient, for taking one
man in ten by lot, they devoured him: when Cambyses heard this, shocked
at their eating one another, he abandoned his expedition against the
Ethiopians, marched back and reached Thebes, after losing a great part
of his army. From Thebes he went down to Memphis, and suffered the
Greeks to sail away. Thus ended the expedition against the Ethiopians.
Those who had been sent against the Ammonians, after having set out from
Thebes, under the conduct of guides, are known to have reached the city
Oasis, which is inhabited by Samians, distant seven days' march from
Thebes, across the sands. This country in the Greek language is called
the Island of the Blessed. But afterward none, except the Ammonians and
those who have heard their report, are able to give any account of them;
for they neither reached the Ammonians, nor returned back. But the
Ammonians make the following report: When they had advanced from this
Oasis toward them across the sands, and were about half-way between them
and Oasis, as they were taking dinner, a vehement south wind blew,
carrying with it heaps of sand, and completely destroyed the whole army.

[Illustration: SAND STORM IN THE DESERT.]

When Cambyses arrived at Memphis, Apis, whom the Greeks call Epaphus,
appeared to the Egyptians; and when this manifestation took place, the
Egyptians immediately put on their richest apparel, and kept festive
holiday. Cambyses, seeing them thus occupied, and concluding that they
made these rejoicings on account of his ill success, summoned the
magistrates of Memphis; and when they came into his presence, he asked
"why the Egyptians had done nothing of the kind when he was at Memphis
before, but did so now, when he had returned with the loss of a great
part of his army." They answered, that their god appeared to them, who
was accustomed to manifest himself at intervals, and that when he did
appear, then all the Egyptians were accustomed to rejoice and keep a
feast. Cambyses, having heard this, said they were liars, and put them
to death. Then he summoned the priests into his presence, and when the
priests gave the same account, he said, that he would find out whether a
god so tractable had come among the Egyptians; and commanded the priests
to bring Apis to him. This Apis, or Epaphus, the Egyptians say, is the
calf of a cow upon which the lightning has descended from heaven. It is
black, and has a square spot of white on the forehead; on the back the
figure of an eagle; and in the tail double hairs; and on the tongue a
beetle. When the priests brought Apis, Cambyses, like one almost out of
his senses, drew his dagger, meaning to strike the belly of Apis, but
hit the thigh; then falling into a fit of laughter, he said to the
priests: "Ye blockheads, are there such gods as these, consisting of
blood and flesh, and sensible of steel? This, truly, is a god worthy of
the Egyptians. But you shall not mock me with impunity." Then he gave
orders to scourge the priests, and kill all the Egyptians who should be
found feasting. Apis, wounded in the thigh, lay and languished in the
temple; and at length, when he had died of the wound, the priests buried
him without the knowledge of Cambyses.

But Cambyses, as the Egyptians say, immediately became mad in
consequence of this atrocity, though he really was not of sound mind
before. His first crime he committed against his brother Smerdis, who
was born of the same father and mother; him he sent back from Egypt to
Persia through envy, because he alone of all the Persians had drawn the
bow, which the Ichthyophagi brought from the Ethiopian, within two
fingers' breadth; of the other Persians no one was able to do this.
After the departure of Smerdis for Persia, Cambyses saw the following
vision in his sleep: he imagined that a messenger arrived from Persia
and informed him that Smerdis was seated on the royal throne, and
touched the heavens with his head. Upon this, fearing for himself, lest
his brother should kill him, and reign, he sent Prexaspes, the most
faithful to him of the Persians, to Persia, with orders to kill Smerdis.
Having gone up to Susa, he killed Smerdis; some say, when he had taken
him out to hunt; but others, that he led him to the Red Sea and drowned
him. This they say was the first of the crimes of Cambyses; the second
was that of marrying his own sister, who had accompanied him into Egypt.

The Greeks say, that one day Cambyses made the whelp of a lion fight
with a young dog; and this wife was also looking on; the dog being
over-matched, another puppy of the same litter broke his chain, and came
to his assistance, and thus the two dogs united got the better of the
whelp. Cambyses was delighted at the sight, but she, sitting by him,
shed tears. Cambyses, observing this, asked her why she wept. She
answered, that she wept seeing the puppy come to the assistance of his
brother, remembering Smerdis, and knowing that there was no one to
avenge him. The Greeks say, that for this speech she was put to death by
Cambyses. But the Egyptians say, that as they were sitting at table, his
wife took a lettuce, stripped off its leaves, and then asked her husband
"whether the lettuce stripped of its leaves, or thick with foliage, was
the handsomer." He said: "When thick with foliage." Whereupon she
remarked: "Then you have imitated this lettuce, in dismembering the
house of Cyrus." Whereupon he, in rage, kicked her and inflicted such
injuries that she died.

Thus madly did Cambyses behave toward his own family; whether on account
of Apis, or from some other cause, from which, in many ways, misfortunes
are wont to befall mankind. For Cambyses is said, even from infancy, to
have been afflicted with a certain severe malady, which some called the
sacred disease.[17] In that case, it was not at all surprising that,
when his body was so diseased, his mind should not be sound. And toward
the other Persians he behaved madly in the following instances: for it
is reported that he said to Prexaspes, whom he highly honored, and whose
office it was to bring messages to him, whose son was cupbearer to
Cambyses, no trifling honor by any means, he is reported to have said:
"Prexaspes, what sort of a man do the Persians think me? and what
remarks do they make about me?" He answered: "Sir, you are highly
extolled in every other respect, but they say you are too much addicted
to wine." The king enraged cried out: "Do the Persians indeed say that,
by being addicted to wine, I am beside myself, and am not in my senses?
then their former words were not true." For, on a former occasion, when
the Persians and Crsus were sitting with him, Cambyses asked, what sort
of a man he appeared to be in comparison with his father Cyrus; they
answered, that he was superior to his father, because he held all that
Cyrus possessed, and had acquired besides Egypt and the empire of the
sea. Crsus, who was not pleased with this decision, spoke thus to
Cambyses: "To me, O son of Cyrus, you do not appear comparable to your
father, for you have not yet such a son as he left behind him." Cambyses
was delighted at hearing this, and commended the judgment of Crsus. So,
remembering this, he said in anger to Prexaspes: "Observe now yourself,
whether the Persians have spoken the truth, or whether they who say such
things are not out of their senses: for if I shoot that son of yours who
stands under the portico, and hit him in the heart, the Persians will
appear to have said nothing to the purpose; but if I miss, then say that
the Persians have spoken the truth, and that I am not of sound mind."
Having said this, and bent his bow, he hit the boy; and when the boy had
fallen, he ordered them to open him and examine the wound; and when the
arrow was found in the heart, he said to the boy's father, laughing:
"Prexaspes, it has been clearly shown to you that I am not mad, but that
the Persians are out of their senses. Now tell me, did you ever see a
man take so true an aim?" But Prexaspes, perceiving him to be out of his
mind, and being in fear for his own life, said: "Sir, I believe that a
god himself could not have shot so well." At another time, having,
without any just cause, seized twelve Persians of the first rank, he had
them buried alive up to the head.

While he was acting in this manner, Crsus the Lydian thought fit to
admonish him in the following terms: "O king, do not yield entirely to
your youthful impulses and anger, but possess and restrain yourself. It
is a good thing to be provident, and wise to have forethought. You put
men to death who are your own subjects, having seized them without any
just cause; and you slay their children. If you persist in such a
course, beware lest the Persians revolt from you. Your father Cyrus
strictly charged me to admonish you, and suggest whatever I might
discover for your good." He thus manifested his good-will, in giving
this advice; but Cambyses answered: "Do you presume to give me advice,
you, who so wisely managed your own country; and so well advised my
father, when you persuaded him to pass the river Araxes, and advance
against the Massaget, when they were willing to cross over into our
territory? You have first ruined yourself by badly governing your own
country, and then ruined Cyrus, who was persuaded by your advice. But
you shall have no reason to rejoice; for I have long wanted to find a
pretext against you." So saying, he took up his bow for the purpose of
shooting him; but Crsus jumped up and ran out. Cambyses, unable to
shoot him, commanded his attendants to seize him, and put him to death.
But the attendants, knowing his temper, concealed Crsus for the
following reason, that if Cambyses should repent, and inquire for
Crsus, they, by producing him, might receive rewards for preserving him
alive; or if he should not repent, or sorrow for him, then they would
put him to death. Not long afterward Cambyses did regret the loss of
Crsus, whereupon the attendants acquainted him that he was still
living; on which Cambyses said: "I am rejoiced that Crsus is still
alive; they, however, who disobeyed my orders and saved him, shall not
escape with impunity, but I will have them put to death." And he made
good his word.

He committed many such mad actions, both against the Persians and his
allies, while he stayed at Memphis opening ancient sepulchres, and
examining the dead bodies; he also entered the temple of Vulcan, and
derided the image, for the image of Vulcan is very much like the
Phnician Pataici, which the Phnicians place at the prows of their
triremes, and is a representation of a pigmy. He likewise entered the
temple of the Cabeiri, (into which it is unlawful for any one except the
priest to enter) and these images he burnt, after he had ridiculed them
in various ways: these also are like that of Vulcan; and they say that
they are the sons of this latter. It is in every way clear to me that
Cambyses was outrageously mad; otherwise he would not have attempted to
deride sacred things and established customs. For if any one should
propose to all men, to select the best institutions of all that exist,
each, after considering them all, would choose his own; so certain is it
that each thinks his own institutions by far the best. It is not
therefore probable, that any but a madman would make such things the
subject of ridicule. That all men are of this mind respecting their own
institutions may be inferred from many proofs, but is well illustrated
by the following incident: Darius once summoned some Greeks under his
sway, and asked them "for what sum they would feed upon the dead bodies
of their parents." They answered, that they would not do it for any sum.
Then Darius called to him some of the Indians called Callatians, who are
accustomed to eat their parents, and asked them, in the presence of the
Greeks, "for what sum they would consent to burn their fathers when they
die." But they made loud exclamations and begged he would speak words of
good omen. Such then is the effect of custom: and Pindar appears to me
to have said rightly "that custom is the king of all men."

[Illustration: ATTACK ON FORT.]

Whilst Cambyses was invading Egypt, the Lacedmonians made an expedition
against Polycrates, who had made an insurrection and seized on Samos. At
first, having divided the state into three parts, he had shared it with
his brothers Pantagnotus and Syloson; but afterward, having put one of
them to death, and expelled Syloson, the younger, he held the whole of
Samos, and made a treaty of friendship with Amasis, King of Egypt,
sending presents, and receiving others from him in return. In a very
short time the power of Polycrates increased, and was noised abroad
throughout Ionia and the rest of Greece; for wherever he turned his
arms, everything turned out prosperously. He had a hundred fifty-oared
galleys, and a thousand archers. And he plundered all without
distinction; for he said that he gratified a friend more by restoring
what he had seized, than by taking nothing at all. He accordingly took
many of the islands, and many cities on the continent; he moreover
overcame in a sea-fight, and took prisoners, the Lesbians, who came to
assist the Milesians with all their forces; these, being put in chains,
dug the whole trench that surrounds the walls of Samos.

The Lacedmonians, arriving with a great armament, besieged Samos,
attacked the fortifications, and passed beyond the tower that faced the
sea near the suburbs; but afterward, when Polycrates himself advanced
with a large force, they were driven back, and after forty days had been
spent in besieging Samos, finding their affairs were not at all
advanced, they returned to Peloponnesus; though a groundless report got
abroad, that Polycrates coined a large quantity of the money of the
country in lead, had it gilt, and gave it to them; whereupon they took
their departure. This was the first expedition that the Lacedmonian
Dorians undertook against Asia.

Those of the Samians who had fomented the war against Polycrates set
sail for Siphnus when the Lacedmonians were about to abandon them, for
they were in want of money. The Siphnians were at that time the richest
of all the islanders, having such gold and silver mines, that from the
tenth of the money accruing from them, a treasure was laid up at Delphi
equal to the richest; and they used every year to divide the product of
the mines. When they established this treasure, they asked the oracle,
whether their present prosperity would continue with them for a long
time; but the Pythian answered as follows: "When the Prytaneum in
Siphnus shall be white, and the market white-fronted, then shall there
be need of a prudent man to guard against a wooden ambush and a crimson
herald." The market and Prytaneum of the Siphnians were then adorned
with Parian marble. As soon as the Samians reached Siphnus, they sent
ambassadors to the city in a ship which, like all ships at that time,
was painted red. And this was what the Pythian meant by a wooden ambush
and a crimson herald. These ambassadors requested the Siphnians to lend
them ten talents; the Siphnians refused the loan, and the Samians
proceeded to ravage their territory. The Siphnians were beaten, and
compelled to give a hundred talents.

[Illustration: THE OBELISK.]

I have dwelt longer on the affairs of the Samians, because they have the
three greatest works that have been accomplished by all the Greeks. The
first is a mountain, one hundred and fifty orgy in height, in which is
dug a tunnel, beginning from the base, with an opening at each side. The
length of the excavation is seven stades, and the height and breadth
eight feet each; through the whole length of it is dug another
excavation twenty cubits deep, and three feet broad, through which the
water conveyed by pipes reaches the city, drawn from a copious fountain.
The architect of this excavation was a Megarian, Eupalinus, son of
Naustrophus. The second work is a mound in the sea round the harbor, in
depth about one hundred orgy; and in length more than two stades. The
third is a temple, the largest of all we have ever seen; of this, the
architect was Rhcus, son of Phileus, a native.




CHAPTER II.

USURPATION OF SMERDIS THE MAGUS AND ACCESSION OF DARIUS.


While Cambyses, son of Cyrus, tarried in Egypt, and was acting madly,
two magi, who were brothers, revolted. One of these, Cambyses had left
steward of his palace, the other was a person very much like Smerdis,
son of Cyrus, whom Cambyses, his own brother, had put to death. The
magus Patizithes, having persuaded this man that he would manage every
thing for him, set him on the throne; and sent heralds in various
directions, particularly to Egypt, to proclaim to the army, that they
must in future obey Smerdis, son of Cyrus, and not Cambyses. The herald
who was appointed to Egypt, finding Cambyses and his army at Ecbatana in
Syria, stood in the midst and proclaimed what had been ordered by the
magus. Cambyses, believing that he spoke the truth, and that he had
himself been betrayed by Prexaspes, and that he, when sent to kill
Smerdis, had not done so, looked toward Prexaspes, and said: "Prexaspes,
hast thou thus performed the business I enjoined upon thee?" But he
answered: "Sire, it is not true that your brother Smerdis has revolted
against you, nor that you can have any quarrel, great or small, with
him. For I myself put your order into execution, and buried him with my
own hands. I think I understand the whole matter, O king: the magi are
the persons who have revolted against you,Patizithes, whom you left
steward of the palace, and his brother Smerdis." When Cambyses heard the
name of Smerdis, the truth of this account and of the dream struck him:
for he fancied in his sleep that some one announced to him that Smerdis,
seated on the royal throne, touched the heavens with his head.
Perceiving, therefore, that he had destroyed his brother without a
cause, he wept bitterly for him, deplored the whole calamity, and leapt
upon his horse, resolving with all speed to march to Susa against the
magus. But as he was leaping on his horse, the chape of his sword's
scabbard fell off, and the blade, being laid bare, struck the thigh;
wounding him in that part where he himself had formerly smitten the
Egyptian god Apis. Mortally wounded, he asked what was the name of the
city. They said it was Ecbatana. And it had been before prophesied to
him from the city of Buto, that he should end his life in Ecbatana. He
had imagined that he should die an old man in Ecbatana of Media, where
all his treasures were; but the oracle in truth meant in Ecbatana of
Syria. When he had thus been informed of the name of the city, though
smitten by misfortune, he returned to his right mind; and comprehending
the oracle, said: "Here it is fated that Cambyses, son of Cyrus, should
die."

Twenty days later he summoned the principal men of the Persians who were
with him, told them his vision and his great mistake, shed bitter tears,
and charged them never to permit the government to return into the hands
of the Medes. When the Persians saw their king weep, all rent the
garments they had on, and gave themselves up to lamentation. Soon the
bone became infected, the thigh mortified, and Cambyses, son of Cyrus,
died, after he had reigned in all seven years and five months, having
never had any children. Great incredulity stole over the Persians who
were present, as to the story that the magi had possession of the
government, and agreed that it must be Smerdis, son of Cyrus, who had
risen up and seized the kingdom. Prexaspes, moreover, vehemently denied
that he had killed Smerdis; for it was not safe for him, now that
Cambyses was dead, to own that he had killed the son of Cyrus with his
own hand.

The magus, after the death of Cambyses, relying on his having the same
name as Smerdis the son of Cyrus, reigned securely during the seven
months that remained to complete the eighth year of Cambyses; in which
time he treated all his subjects with such beneficence, that at his
death, all the people of Asia, except the Persians, regretted his loss.
For the magus, on assuming the sovereignty, despatched messengers to
every nation he ruled over, and proclaimed a general exemption from
military service and tribute for the space of three years. But in the
eighth month he was discovered in the following manner. Otanes, son of
Pharnaspes, was by birth and fortune equal to the first of the Persians.
This Otanes first suspected the magus not to be Smerdis the son of
Cyrus, from the fact, that he never went out of the citadel, and that he
never summoned any of the principal men of Persia to his presence.
Having conceived suspicion of him, he contrived the following artifice.
Cambyses had married his daughter, whose name was Phdyma; the magus of
course had her as his wife, as well as all the rest of the wives of
Cambyses. Otanes therefore, sending to his daughter, inquired whether
her husband was Smerdis, son of Cyrus, or some other person; she sent
back word to him, saying that she did not know. Otanes sent a second
time, saying: "If you do not yourself know Smerdis, son of Cyrus, then
inquire of Atossa, for she must of necessity know her own brother." To
this his daughter replied: "I can neither have any conversation with
Atossa, nor see any of the women who used to live with me; for as soon
as this man, whoever he is, succeeded to the throne, he dispersed us
all, assigning us separate apartments." When Otanes heard this, the
matter appeared much more plain; and he sent a third message to her in
these words: "Daughter, it becomes you, being of noble birth, to
undertake any peril that your father may require you to incur. For if
this Smerdis is not the son of Cyrus, but the person whom I suspect, it
is not fit that he should escape with impunity, but suffer the
punishment due to his offences. Now follow my directions: watch your
opportunity, and whenever you discover him to be sound asleep, touch his
ears; and if you find he has ears, be assured that he is Smerdis, son of
Cyrus; but if he has none, then he is Smerdis the magus." To this
message Phdyma answered, saying "that she should incur very great
danger by doing so; for he kept the sides of his head concealed, and if
he had no ears, and she should be discovered touching him, she well knew
that he would put her to death; nevertheless she would make the
attempt." Cyrus, during his reign, had cut off the ears of this Smerdis
the magus, for some grave offence. Phdyma, therefore, determining to
execute all that she had promised her father, catching the magus sound
asleep on his couch one day felt for his ears, and perceiving without
any difficulty that the man had no ears, as soon as it was day, she sent
and made known to her father what the case was.

Thereupon Otanes, having taken with him Aspathines and Gobryas, who were
the noblest of the Persians, and persons on whom he could best rely,
related to them the whole affair; and they agreed that each should
associate with himself a Persian in whom he could place most reliance.
Otanes accordingly introduced Intaphernes; Gobryas, Megabyzus; and
Aspathines, Hydarnes. Just at this time Darius, son of Hystaspes,
arrived at Susa from Persia, where his father was governor, and the six
Persians determined to admit Darius to the confederacy. These seven met,
exchanged pledges with each other, and conferred together. When it came
to the turn of Darius to declare his opinion, he addressed them as
follows: "I thought that I was the only person who knew that it was the
magus who reigns, and that Smerdis, son of Cyrus, is dead; and for this
very reason I hastened hither in order to contrive the death of the
magus. But since it proves that you also are acquainted with the fact,
it appears to me that we should act immediately." Otanes said to this:
"Son of Hystaspes, you are born of a noble father, and show yourself not
at all inferior to him; do not, however, so inconsiderately hasten this
enterprise, but set about it with more caution; for we must increase our
numbers, and then attempt it." Darius replied to this: "Be assured, ye
men who are here present, if you adopt the plan proposed by Otanes, you
will all miserably perish; for some one will discover it to the magus,
consulting his own private advantage; indeed, you ought to have carried
out your project immediately, without communicating it to any one else;
but since you have thought fit to refer it to others, and have disclosed
it to me, let us carry it out this very day, or be assured, that if this
day passes over, no one shall be beforehand with me and become my
accuser, but I myself will denounce you to the magus." Otanes, seeing
Darius so eager, replied: "Since you compel us to precipitate our
enterprise, and will not permit us to defer it, tell us in what way we
are to enter the palace and attack him; for you yourself know that
guards are stationed at intervals; and how shall we pass them?" "There
are many things," said Darius, "that can not be made clear by words, but
may by action; and there are other things that seem practicable in
description, but no signal effect proceeds from them. Be assured that
the guards stationed there will not be at all difficult to pass by: for
in the first place, seeing our rank, there is no one who will not allow
us to pass, partly from respect, and partly from fear; and in the next
place, I have a most specious pretext by which we shall gain admission,
for I will say that I have just arrived from Persia, and wish to report
a message to the king from my father. For when a lie must be told, let
it be told. Whoever of the doorkeepers shall willingly let us pass,
shall be rewarded in due time; but whoever offers to oppose us must
instantly be treated as an enemy." After this Gobryas said: "Friends,
shall we ever have a better opportunity to recover the sovereign power,
or if we shall be unable to do so, to die? seeing we who are Persians,
are governed by an earless Medic magus. Those among you who were present
with Cambyses when he lay sick, well remember the imprecations he
uttered at the point of death against the Persians, if they should not
attempt to repossess themselves of the sovereign power: we did not then
believe this story, but thought that Cambyses spoke from ill-will. I
give my voice that we yield to Darius, and that on breaking up this
conference we go direct to the magus." And all assented to his proposal.

Meantime the magi, on consultation, determined to make Prexaspes their
friend: both because he had suffered grievous wrong from Cambyses, who
shot his son dead with an arrow; and because he alone of all the
Persians knew of the death of Smerdis, son of Cyrus, as he had
despatched him with his own hand; and moreover, Prexaspes was in high
repute with the Persians. Therefore, having sent for Prexaspes, they
endeavored to win his friendship, binding him by pledges and oaths, that
he would never divulge to any man the cheat they had put upon the
Persians, assuring him that in return they would give him every thing
his heart could desire. When Prexaspes had promised that he would do as
the magi wished, they made a second proposal, saying, that they would
assemble all the Persians under the walls of the palace, and desired
that he would ascend a tower, and assure them that they were governed by
Smerdis, son of Cyrus. Prexaspes assented, and the magi, having convoked
the Persians, placed him on the top of a turret, and commanded him to
harangue the people. But he purposely forgot what they desired him to
say, and, beginning from Achmenes, described the genealogy of Cyrus'
family; told them what great benefits Cyrus had done the Persians; and
finally declared the whole truth, saying that he had before concealed
it, as it was not safe for him to tell what had happened; but that in
the present emergency necessity constrained him to make it known. He
accordingly told them that he, being compelled by Cambyses, had put
Smerdis, son of Cyrus, to death, and that it was the magi who then
reigned. After he had uttered many imprecations against the Persians, if
they should not recover back the sovereign power, and punish the magi,
he threw himself headlong from the tower. Thus died Prexaspes, a man
highly esteemed during the course of his whole life.

[Illustration: MAMELUKE TOMB, CAIRO.]

The seven Persians, resolving to attack the magi without delay, had
offered prayers to the gods, and were in the midst of their way when
they were informed of all that Prexaspes had done, whereupon they again
conferred together; and some, with Otanes, strongly advised to defer the
enterprise while affairs were in such a ferment; but others, with
Darius, urged to proceed at once. While hotly disputing there appeared
seven pairs of hawks pursuing two pairs of vultures, and plucking and
tearing them. The seven, on seeing this, all approved the opinion of
Darius, and forthwith proceeded to the palace, emboldened by the omen.
When they approached the gates, it happened as Darius had supposed; for
the guards, out of respect for men of highest rank among the Persians,
and not suspecting any such design on their part, let them pass by,
moved as they were by divine impulse; nor did any one question them. But
when they reached the hall, they fell in with the eunuchs appointed to
carry in messages, who inquired of them for what purpose they had come;
and at the same time that they questioned them they threatened the
doorkeepers for permitting them to pass, and endeavored to prevent the
seven from proceeding any farther. They instantly drew their daggers,
stabbed all that opposed their passage on the spot, and then rushed to
the men's apartment. The magi happened to be both within at the time,
and were consulting about the conduct of Prexaspes. But seeing the
eunuchs in confusion, and hearing their outcry, they hurried out, and
put themselves on the defensive. One snatched up a bow, and the other a
javelin, and the parties engaged with each other. The one who had taken
up the bow, seeing his enemies were near and pressing upon them, found
it of no use; but the other made resistance with his spear, and first
wounded Aspathines in the thigh, and next Intaphernes in the eye; and
Intaphernes lost his eye from the wound, but did not die. The other
magus, when he found his bow of no service, fled to a chamber adjoining
the men's apartment, purposing to shut to the door, and two of the
seven, Darius and Gobryas, rushed in with him; and as Gobryas was
grappling with the magus, Darius standing by was in perplexity, fearing
that he should strike Gobryas in the dark; but Gobryas, seeing that he
stood by inactive, asked him why he did not use his hand. He answered:
"Fearing for you, lest I should strike you." "Never mind," said Gobryas,
"drive your sword through both of us." Darius obeyed, thrust with his
dagger, and by good fortune hit the magus.

Having slain the magi, and cut off their heads, they left the wounded of
their own party there, as well on account of their exhaustion as to
guard the acropolis; but the other five of them, carrying the heads of
the magi, ran out with shouting and clamor, and called upon the rest of
the Persians, relating what they had done, and showing them the heads;
and at the same time they slew every one of the magi that came in their
way. The Persians, informed of what had been done by the seven, and of
the fraud of the magi, determined themselves also to do the like; and
having drawn their daggers, they slew every magus they could find; and
if the night coming on had not prevented, they would not have left a
single magus alive. This day the Persians observe in common more than
any other, and in it they celebrate a great festival, which they call
"The Slaughter of the Magi." On that day no magus is allowed to be seen
in public.

When the tumult had subsided, and five days had elapsed, those who had
risen up against the magi deliberated on the state of affairs. Otanes
advised that they should commit the government to the Persians at large,
"for," said he, "how can a monarchy be a well-constituted government,
where one man is allowed to do whatever he pleases without control?"
Megabyzus advised them to intrust the government to an oligarchy, and
said: "Let us choose an association of the best men, and commit the
sovereign power to them, for among them we ourselves shall be included,
and it is reasonable to expect that the best counsels will proceed from
the best men." Darius expressed his opinion the third, saying: "What
Megabyzus has said concerning the people was spoken rightly, but if
three forms are proposed, and each the best in its kind, democracy,
oligarchy, and monarchy, I contend that the last is far superior. For
nothing can be found better than one man, who is the best; since acting
upon equally wise plans, he would govern the people without blame, and
would keep his designs most secret from the ill-affected. But in an
oligarchy, whilst many are exerting their energies for the public good,
strong private enmities commonly spring up; for each wishing to be
chief, and to carry his own opinions, they come to deep animosities one
against another, whence seditions arise; and from seditions, murder; and
from murder recourse is always had to a monarchy; and thus it is proved
that this form of government is the best. Also when the people rule, it
is impossible that evil should not spring up, and powerful combinations,
for they who injure the commonwealth act in concert; and this lasts
until some one of the people stands forward and puts them down; and on
this account, being admired by the people, he becomes a monarch; this
again shows that a monarchy is best. Moreover, we should not subvert the
institutions of our ancestors, when we see how good they are."

Four of the seven adhered to this opinion. Then said Otanes:
"Associates, since it is evident that some one of us must be made king,
I will not enter into competition with you; for I wish neither to govern
nor be governed. But on this condition I give up all claim to the
government, that neither I nor any of my posterity may be subject to any
one of you." The six agreed to these terms, and he withdrew from the
assembly; and this family alone, of all the Persians, retains its
liberty to this day, and yields obedience only so far as it pleases, but
without transgressing the laws of the Persians. The rest of the seven
consulted how they might appoint a king on the most equitable terms; and
they determined that Otanes and his posterity forever should be given a
Median vest yearly, by way of distinction, together with all such
presents as are accounted most honorable among the Persians, for he
first advised the enterprise, and associated them together. And they
made the resolution that every one of the seven should have liberty to
enter into the palace without being introduced, and that the king should
not be allowed to marry a wife out of any other family than of the
conspirators. With regard to the kingdom, they determined that he whose
horse should first neigh in the suburbs at sunrise, while they were
mounted, should have the kingdom.

Darius had a groom, a shrewd man, whose name was bares, to whom, when
the assembly had broken up, Darius said: "bares, we have determined
that he whose horse shall neigh first at sunrise, when we ourselves are
mounted, is to have the kingdom. Now, if you have any ingenuity,
contrive that I may obtain this honor, and not another." bares
answered: "If, sir, it depends on this, whether you shall be king or
not, keep up your spirits; for no one else shall be king before you; I
know a trick that will make him neigh." At dawn of day, the six, as they
had agreed, met together on horseback; and as they were riding round the
suburbs, Darius' horse, at the signal from bares, ran forward and
neighed, and at that instant lightning and thunder came from a clear
sky. These things consummated the auspices, as if done by appointment,
and the others, dismounting from their horses, did obeisance to Darius
as king.

[Illustration: EGYPTIAN WAR CHARIOT, WARRIOR AND HORSES.]

Accordingly Darius, son of Hystaspes, was declared king, and all the
people of Asia, except the Arabians, were subject to him. The Arabians
never submitted to the Persian yoke, but were on friendly terms, and
gave Cambyses a free passage into Egypt; for without the consent of the
Arabians the Persians could not have penetrated into Egypt. Darius
contracted his first marriages with Persians; he married two daughters
of Cyrus, Atossa and Artystona; Atossa, you remember, had been before
married to her brother Cambyses, and afterward to the magus. He married
another also, daughter of Smerdis, son of Cyrus, whose name was Parmys;
and he had besides, the daughter of Otanes who detected the magus. His
power was fully established on all sides. He erected a stone statue,
representing a man on horseback; and he had engraved on it the following
inscription: "Darius, son of Hystaspes, by the sagacity of his horse,
(here mentioning the name,) and by the address of bares, his groom,
obtained the empire of the Persians." In Persia, he constituted twenty
governments, which they call satrapies; set governors over them, and
appointed tributes to be paid to him from each. In consequence of this
imposition of tribute, and other things of a similar kind, the Persians
say Darius was a trader, Cambyses a master, and Cyrus a father. The
first, because he made profit of every thing; the second, because he was
severe and arrogant; the last, because he was mild, and always aimed at
the good of his people. If the total of all his revenues is computed
together, fourteen thousand five hundred and sixty Euboic talents were
collected by Darius as an annual tribute,[18] passing over many small
sums which I do not mention. This tribute accrued to Darius from Asia
and a small part of Libya; but in the course of time another revenue
accrued from the islands, and the inhabitants of Europe as far as
Thessaly. This treasure the king melts and pours into earthen jars, and
knocking away the earthen mould when he wants money he cuts off as much
as he has occasion to use.

The Cilicians were required to send each year to Darius three hundred
and sixty white horses, one for every day. The Persian territory alone
was not subject to tribute; but the Persians brought gifts. The
Ethiopians bordering on Egypt, whom Cambyses subdued when he marched
against the Macrobian Ethiopians, and who dwell about the sacred city of
Nysa, celebrate festivals of Bacchus, use the same grain as the
Calantian Indians, and live in subterraneous dwellings. These brought
every third year two chnices of unmolten gold, two hundred blocks of
ebony, five Ethiopian boys, and twenty large elephants' tusks.




CHAPTER III.

INDIANS, ARABIANS, AND ETHIOPIANS.


That part of India toward the rising sun is all sand; for of the people
with whom we are acquainted, and of whom any thing certain is told, the
Indians live the farthest toward the east of all the inhabitants of
Asia; and the Indians' country toward the east is a desert, by reason of
the sands. There are many nations of Indians, and they do not all speak
the same language; some of them are nomads, and they inhabit the marshes
of the river, and feed on raw fish, which they take going out in boats
made of bamboo, one joint of which makes a boat. These Indians wear a
garment made of rushes cut from the river, beaten flat, platted like a
mat, and worn as a corselet. Other Indians, living to the east of these,
are nomads, and eat raw flesh; they are called Padans. When any one of
this community is sick, if it be a man, the men who are his nearest
connections put him to death, alleging that if he wasted by disease his
flesh would be spoiled; and no matter if he denies that he is sick, they
are not likely to agree with him, but kill and feast upon him. And if a
woman be sick, the women who are most intimate with her do the same as
the men. And whoever reaches to old age, they sacrifice and feast upon;
but few among them succeed in growing old, for before that, every one
that falls into any distemper is put to death. Other Indians have
different customs: they neither kill any thing that has life, nor sow
any thing, nor are they wont to have houses, but they live upon herbs,
and have a grain of the size of millet, in a pod, which springs
spontaneously from the earth; this they gather, and boil and eat it with
the pod. When any one of them falls ill, he goes and lies down in the
desert, and no one takes any thought about him, whether dead or sick.
All these Indians whom I have mentioned have a complexion closely
resembling the Ethiopians. They are situated very far from the Persians,
toward the south, and were never subject to Darius.

Those who border on the city of Caspatyrus and the country of Pactyica
are the most warlike of the Indians, and these are they who are sent to
procure the gold. In this desert, and in the sand, there are ants in
size somewhat less indeed than dogs, but larger than foxes. Some of them
which were taken there, are in the possession of the king of the
Persians. These ants, forming their habitations under ground, heap up
the sand, as the ants in Greece do, and in the same manner; and they are
very much like them in shape. The sand thus heaped up is mixed with
gold. The Indians go to the desert to get this sand, each man having
three camels, on either side a male harnessed to draw by the side, and a
female in the middle; this last the man mounts himself, having taken
care to yoke one that has been separated from her young as recently born
as possible; for camels are not inferior to horses in swiftness, and are
much better able to carry burdens. What kind of figure the camel has I
shall not describe to the Greeks, as they are acquainted with it; but
what is not known respecting it I will mention. A camel has four thighs
and four knees in his hinder legs. The Indians then, adopting such a
plan of harnessing, set out for the gold, having before calculated the
time, so as to be engaged in their plunder during the hottest part of
the day, for during the heat the ants hide themselves under ground.
Amongst these people the sun is hottest in the morning, and not, as with
us, at mid-day; during this time it scorches much more than at mid-day
in Greece; so that, it is said, they then refresh themselves in water.
But as the day declines, the sun becomes to them as it is in the morning
to others; and after this, as it proceeds it becomes still colder, until
sunset, then it is very cold. When the Indians arrive at the spot with
their sacks, they fill them with the sand, and return as fast as
possible. For the ants, as the Persians say, immediately discovering
them by the smell, pursue them, and they are equalled in swiftness by no
other animal, so that if the Indians did not get the start of the ants
while they were assembling, not a man of them could be saved. Now the
male camels (for they are inferior in speed to the females) would
otherwise slacken their pace, dragging on, not both equally; but the
females, mindful of the young they have left, do not slacken their pace.
Thus the Indians obtain the greatest part of their gold.

[Illustration: MILITARY DRUM.]

The extreme parts of the inhabited world somehow possess the most
excellent products; while Greece enjoys by far the best-tempered
climate. In India, the farthest part of the inhabited world toward the
east, all animals, both quadrupeds and birds, are much larger than they
are in other countries, with the exception of horses; in this respect
they are surpassed by the Medic breed called the Nysan horses. Then
there is an abundance of gold there, partly dug, partly brought down by
the rivers, and partly seized in the manner I have described. And
certain wild trees there bear wool instead of fruit, which in beauty and
quality excels that of sheep; and the Indians make their clothing from
these trees. Again, Arabia is the farthest of inhabited countries toward
the south; and this is the only region in which grow frankincense,
myrrh, cassia, cinnamon, and ledanum. All these, except myrrh, the
Arabians gather with difficulty. The frankincense they gather by burning
styrax, which the Phnicians import into Greece. Winged serpents, small
in size, and various in form, guard the trees that bear frankincense, a
great number round each tree. These are the same serpents that invade
Egypt. They are driven from the trees by nothing else but the smoke of
the styrax. Vipers are found in all parts of the world; but flying
serpents in Arabia, and nowhere else; there they appear to be very
numerous.

The Arabians obtain the cassia, which grows in marshes or shallow lakes,
by covering their whole body and face, except the eyes, with hides and
skins, and thus avoiding the attacks of the winged animals, like bats,
which infest the marshes, and screech fearfully, and are exceedingly
fierce. The cinnamon they collect in a still more wonderful manner.
Where it grows and what land produces it they are unable to tell; except
that some say it grows in those countries in which Bacchus was nursed.
Large birds bring those rolls of bark, which we, from the Phnicians,
call cinnamon, for their nests, which are built with clay, against
precipitous mountains, where there is no access for man. The Arabians,
to surmount this difficulty, cut up into large pieces the limbs of dead
oxen, and asses, and other beasts of burden, carry them to these spots,
lay them near the nests, and retire to a distance. The birds fly down
and carry up the limbs of the beasts to their nests, which not being
strong enough to support the weight, break and fall to the ground. Then
the men, coming up, gather the cinnamon, much of which they export to
other countries. Still more wonderful is the fragrant ledanum. For it is
found sticking like gum to the beards of he-goats, which collect it from
the wood. It is useful for many ointments, and the Arabians burn it very
generally as a perfume. They are famous for their perfumes; and there
breathes from Arabia, as it were, a divine odor. They have two kinds of
sheep worthy of admiration, which are seen nowhere else. One kind has
large tails, not less than three cubits in length, which, if suffered to
trail, would ulcerate, by the tails rubbing on the ground. But every
shepherd knows enough of the carpenter's art to prevent this, for they
make little carts and fasten them under the tails, binding the tail of
each separate sheep to a separate cart. The other kind of sheep have
broad tails, even to a cubit in breadth. Where the meridian declines[19]
toward the setting sun, the Ethiopian territory extends, being the
extreme part of the habitable world. It produces much gold, huge
elephants, wild trees of all kinds, ebony, and men of large stature,
very handsome, and long-lived.

Such are the extremities of Asia and Libya. Concerning the western
extremities of Europe I am unable to speak with certainty, for I do not
admit that there is a river, called by barbarians Eridanus, which
discharges itself into the sea toward the north, from which amber is
said to come; nor am I acquainted with the Cassiterides Islands, whence
our tin comes. For in the first place, the name Eridanus shows that it
is Grecian and not barbarian, and coined by some poet; in the next
place, though I have diligently inquired, I have never been able to hear
from any man who has himself seen it, that there is a sea on that side
of Europe. However, both tin and amber come to us from the remotest
parts. Toward the north of Europe there is evidently a very great
quantity of gold, but how procured I am unable to say with certainty;
though it is said that the Arimaspians, a one-eyed people, steal it from
the griffins. Nor do I believe this, that any men are born with one eye,
and yet in other respects resemble the rest of mankind. However, the
extremities of the world seem to surround and enclose the rest of the
earth, and to possess those productions which we account most excellent
and rare.




CHAPTER IV.

REIGN OF DARIUS TO THE TAKING OF BABYLON.


Of the seven men that conspired against the magus, it happened that one
of them, Intaphernes, by an act of insolence, lost his life shortly
after the revolution. He wished to enter the palace in order to confer
with Darius; but the door-keeper and the messenger would not let him
pass, saying, that the king was engaged, but Intaphernes, suspecting
they told a falsehood, drew his scimetar, cut off their ears and noses,
and having strung them to straps taken from his bridle, hung them round
their necks, and dismissed them. They presented themselves to the king,
and told him the cause for which they had been so treated. Darius,
fearing lest the six had done this in concert, sent for them, one by
one, and endeavored to discover whether they approved of what had been
done. When he found that Intaphernes had not done this with their
knowledge, he seized Intaphernes himself, and his children, and all his
family, having many reasons to suspect that he, with his relations,
would raise a rebellion against him. And he bound them as for death: but
the wife of Intaphernes, going to the gates of the palace, wept and
lamented aloud; and prevailed on Darius to have compassion on her. He
therefore sent a messenger to say as follows: "Madam, king Darius allows
you to release one of your relations who are now in prison, whichever of
them all you please." She deliberated, and answered: "Since the king
grants me the life of one, I choose my brother from them all." Darius,
wondering at her choice, asked: "Madam, the king inquires the reason
why, leaving your husband and children, you have chosen that your
brother should survive; who is not so near related to you as your
children, and less dear to you than your husband?" "O king," she
answered, "I may have another husband if God will, and other children if
I lose these; but as my father and mother are no longer alive, I cannot
by any means have another brother; for this reason I spoke as I did."
This pleased Darius so well that he granted to her the one whom she
asked, and also her eldest son; all the rest he put to death.

[Illustration: ALPHABET.]

It happened not long after this that Darius, in leaping from his horse
while hunting, twisted his foot with such violence that the ankle-bone
was dislocated. At first thinking he had about him Egyptians who had the
first reputation for skill in the healing art, he made use of their
assistance. But they, by twisting the foot, and using force, made the
evil worse; and from the pain which he felt, Darius lay seven days and
seven nights without sleep. On the eighth day, as he still continued in
a bad state, some one who had before heard at Sardis of the skill of
Democedes the Crotonian, made it known to Darius; and he ordered them to
bring him to him as quickly as possible. They found him among the slaves
altogether neglected; and brought him forward, dragging fetters behind
him, and clothed in rags. As he stood before him, Darius asked him
whether he understood the art. He denied that he did, fearing lest, if
he discovered himself, he should be altogether precluded from returning
to Greece. But he appeared to Darius to dissemble, although he was
skilled in the art; he therefore commanded those who had brought him
thither to bring out whips and goads. Whereupon he owned up, saying that
he did not know it perfectly, but having been intimate with a physician,
he had some poor knowledge of the art. Upon which Darius put himself
under his care, and by using Grecian medicines, and applying lenitives
after violent remedies, he caused him to sleep, and in a little time
restored him to his health, though Darius had begun to despair of ever
recovering the use of his foot. After this cure, Darius presented him
with two pairs of golden fetters; but Democedes asked him, if he
purposely gave him a double evil because he had restored him to health.
Darius, pleased with the speech, introduced him to his wives, with the
remark that this was the man who had saved the king's life; whereupon
each of them dipped a goblet into a chest of gold, and presented it
brimful to Democedesso munificent a gift, that a servant named Sciton,
following behind, picked up enough staters that fell from the goblets to
make him a rich man.

This Democedes had been so harshly treated at Crotona by his father, who
was of a severe temper, that he left him and went to gina; having
settled there, in the first year, though he was unprovided with means,
and had none of the instruments necessary for the exercise of his art,
he surpassed the most skilful of their physicians. In the second year,
the ginet engaged him for a talent out of the public treasury; and in
the third year the Athenians, for a hundred min; and in the fourth year
Polycrates, for two talents; thus he came to Samos. From this man the
Crotonian physicians obtained a great reputation; for at this period the
physicians of Crotona were said to be the first throughout Greece, and
the Cyrenans the second. At the same time the Argives were accounted
the most skilful of the Greeks in the art of music. Democedes, having
completely cured Darius at Susa, had a very large house, and a seat at
the king's table; and he had every thing he could wish for, except the
liberty of returning to Greece. He obtained from the king a pardon for
the Egyptian physicians who first attended the king, and were about to
be empaled, because they had been outdone by a Greek physician; and in
the next place he procured the liberty of a prophet of Elis, who had
attended Polycrates, and lay neglected among the slaves. In short,
Democedes had great influence with the king.

Not long after Atossa, daughter of Cyrus, and wife to Darius, had a
tumor on her breast; after some time it burst, and spread considerably.
As long as it was small, she concealed it, and from delicacy informed no
one of it; when it became dangerous, she sent for Democedes and showed
it to him. He said that he could cure her, but exacted a solemn promise,
that she in return would perform for him whatever he should require of
her, but added that he would ask nothing which might bring disgrace on
her. When therefore he had healed her, and restored her to health,
Atossa, instructed by Democedes, addressed Darius, in the following
words: "O king, you, who possess so great power, sit idle, and do not
add any nation or power to the Persians. It is right that a man who is
both young and master of such vast treasures should render himself
considerable by his actions, that the Persians may know that they are
governed by a man. Two motives should influence you, to such a course:
first, that the Persians may know that it is a worthy man who rules over
them; and secondly, that they may be worn in war, and not tempted by too
much ease to plot against you. You must perform some illustrious action
while you are in the flower of your age; for the mind grows with the
growth of the body, and as it grows old, grows old with it, and dull for
every action." She spoke thus according to her instructions, and he
answered: "Lady, you have mentioned the very things that I myself
propose to do; for I have determined to make a bridge and march from
this continent to the other, against the Scythians; and this shall
shortly be put in execution." Atossa replied: "Give up the thought of
marching first against the Scythians, for they will be in your power
whenever you choose; but take my advice, and lead an army into Greece;
for from the account I have heard, I am anxious to have Lacedmonian,
Argive, Athenian, and Corinthian attendants: and you have the fittest
man in the world to show and inform you of every thing concerning
Greece; I mean the person who cured your foot." Said Darius: "Well,
since you think I ought to make my first attempt against Greece, I think
it better first to send some Persians thither as spies with the man you
mention; they, when they are informed of and have seen every particular,
will make a report to me; and then, being thoroughly informed, I will
turn my arms against them." No sooner said than done; for as soon as day
dawned, he summoned fifteen eminent Persians, and commanded them to
accompany Democedes along the maritime parts of Greece; and to take care
that Democedes did not escape from them, but they must by all means
bring him back again. He next summoned Democedes himself, and requested
that when he should have conducted the Persians through all Greece, and
shown it to them, to return; he also commanded him to take with him all
his movables as presents to his father and brothers, promising to give
him many times as much instead. Moreover, he said, that for the purpose
of transporting the presents he would give a merchant-ship, filled with
all kinds of precious things, which should accompany him on his voyage.
Now Darius, in my opinion, promised him these things without any
deceitful intention; but Democedes, fearing lest Darius was making trial
of him, received all that was given, without eagerness, but said that he
would leave his own goods where they were, that he might have them on
his return; the merchant-ship he said he would accept.

In Sidon, a city of Phnicia, they manned two triremes, and with them
also a large trading vessel, laden with all kinds of precious things;
and set sail for Greece. Keeping to the shore, they surveyed the coasts,
and made notes in writing; at length, having inspected the greatest part
of it, and whatever was most remarkable, they proceeded to Tarentum in
Italy. There, out of kindness toward Democedes, Aristophilides, king of
the Tarentines, took off the rudders of the Median ships, and shut up
the Persians as spies. While they were in this condition Democedes went
to Crotona and when he had reached his own home, Aristophilides set the
Persians at liberty, and restored what he had taken from their ships.
The Persians pursuing Democedes, arrived at Crotona, found him in the
public market, and laid hands on him. Some of the Crotonians, dreading
the Persian power, were ready to deliver him up; but others seized the
Persians in turn, and beat them with staves, though they expostulated in
these terms: "Men of Crotona, have a care what you do, you are rescuing
a man who is a runaway from the king; how will king Darius endure to be
thus insulted? How can what you do end well, if you force this man from
us? What city shall we sooner attack than this? What sooner shall we
endeavor to reduce to slavery?" But they could not persuade the
Crotonians; so launching a small boat they sailed back to Asia; nor, as
they were deprived of their guide, did they attempt to explore Greece
any further. At their departure Democedes enjoined them to tell Darius
that he had Milo's daughter affianced to him as his wife, for the name
of Milo, the wrestler, stood high with the king; and on this account it
appears to me that Democedes spared no expense to hasten this marriage,
that he might appear to Darius to be a man of consequence in his own
country.

After these things, king Darius took Samos, first of all the cities,
either Grecian or barbarian, and for the following reason. When
Cambyses, son of Cyrus, invaded Egypt, many Greeks resorted thither;
some, as one may conjecture, on account of trade; others, to serve as
soldiers; others, to view the country. Of these, the last was Syloson,
son of aces, brother to Polycrates, and an exile from Samos. The
following piece of good luck befel this Syloson: having put on a scarlet
cloak, he walked in the streets of Memphis; and Darius, who was one of
Cambyses' guard, and as yet a man of no great account, took a fancy to
the cloak, and coming up, wished to purchase it. But Syloson, perceiving
that Darius was very anxious to have the cloak, impelled by a divine
impulse, said: "I will not sell it for any sum, but I will give it you
for nothing, if so it must needs be." Darius accepted his offer with
thanks and took the cloak. Syloson thought afterward that he had lost it
through his good nature, but when, in course of time, Cambyses died, and
the seven rose up against the magus, and of the seven, Darius possessed
the throne, Syloson heard that the kingdom had devolved on the man to
whom he had given his cloak in Egypt on his requesting it; so he went up
to Susa and seated himself at the threshold of the king's palace, and
said he had been a benefactor to Darius. The porter reported it to the
king; who said: "What Greek is my benefactor, to whom I owe a debt of
gratitude, having so lately come to the throne? Scarcely one of them has
as yet come here; nor can I mention any thing that I owe to a Greek.
However, bring him in, that I may know the meaning of what he says." The
porter introduced Syloson, who related the story of the cloak, and said
that he was the person who gave it. "Most generous of men!" exclaimed
the king, "art thou then the man who, when as yet I had no power, made
me a present, small as it was? yet the obligation is the same as if I
were now to receive a thing of great value. In return I will give thee
abundance of gold and silver, so that thou shalt never repent having
conferred a favor on Darius son of Hystaspes." To this Syloson replied:
"O king, give me neither gold nor silver; but recover and give me back
my country, Samos, which now, since my brother Polycrates died by the
hands of Ortes, a slave of ours has possessed. Give me this without
bloodshed and bondage." Then Darius sent an army under the conduct of
Otanes, one of the seven, with orders to accomplish whatever Syloson
should desire.

Mandrius held the government of Samos, having had the administration
intrusted to him by Polycrates: though he wished to prove himself the
most just of men, he was unable to effect his purpose. For when the
death of Polycrates was made known to him, he erected an altar to
Jupiter Liberator, and marked round it the sacred enclosure, which is
now in the suburbs. Afterward, he summoned an assembly of all the
citizens, and said: "To me, as you know, the sceptre and all the power
of Polycrates has been intrusted, and I am now able to retain the
government. But what I condemn in another, I will myself, to the utmost
of my ability, abstain from doing. For neither did Polycrates please me
in exercising despotic power over men equal to himself, nor would any
other who should do the like. Now Polycrates has accomplished his fate;
and I, surrendering the government into your hands, proclaim equality to
all. I require, however, that the following remuneration should be
granted to myself; that six talents should be given me out of the
treasures of Polycrates; and in addition, I claim for myself and my
descendants for ever, the priesthood of the temple of Jupiter Liberator,
to whom I have erected an altar, and under whose auspices I restore to
you your liberties." But one of them rising up said, "You forsooth are
not worthy to rule over us, being as you are a base and pestilent
fellow; rather think how you will render an account of the wealth that
you have had the management of." Thus spoke a man of eminence among the
citizens, whose name was Telesarchus. But Mandrius, perceiving that if
he should lay down the power, some other would set himself up as a
tyrant in his place, no longer thought of laying it down. To which end,
when he had withdrawn to the citadel, sending for each one severally, as
if about to give an account of the treasures, he seized them and put
them in chains. They were kept in confinement; but after this, disease
attacked Mandrius; and his brother, whose name was Lycaretus, supposing
that he would die, in order that he might the more easily possess
himself of the government of Samos, put all the prisoners to death; for,
as it seems, they were not willing to be free.

When the Persians arrived at Samos, bringing Syloson with them, no one
raised a hand against them, and the partisans of Mandrius, and
Mandrius himself, said they were ready to quit the island under a
treaty; and when Otanes had assented to this, and had ratified the
agreement, the principal men of the Persians, having had seats placed
for them, sat down opposite the citadel. The tyrant Mandrius had a
brother somewhat out of his senses, whose name was Charilaus; he, for
some fault he had committed, was confined in a dungeon; and having at
that time overheard what was doing, and having peeped through his
dungeon, when he saw the Persians sitting quietly down, he shouted and
said that he wished to speak with Mandrius. Mandrius commanded him to
be released, and brought into his presence; and as soon as he was
brought there, upbraiding and reviling his brother, he urged him to
attack the Persians, saying: "Me, O vilest of men, who am your own
brother, and have done nothing worthy of bonds, you have bound and
adjudged to a dungeon; but when you see the Persians driving you out and
making you houseless, you dare not avenge yourself, though they are so
easy to be subdued. But if you are in dread of them, lend me your
auxiliaries, and I will punish them for coming here, and I am ready also
to send you out of the island." Mandrius accepted his offer, as I
think, not that he had reached such a pitch of folly as to imagine that
his own power could overcome that of the king, but rather out of envy to
Syloson, if without a struggle he should possess himself of the city
uninjured. Having therefore provoked the Persians, he wished to make the
Samian power as weak as possible, and then give it up; being well
assured that the Persians, if they suffered any ill-treatment, would be
exasperated against the Samians; and knowing also that he himself had a
safe retreat from the island, whenever he chose, for he had had a secret
passage dug leading from the citadel to the sea. Accordingly Mandrius
himself sailed away from Samos; but Charilaus armed all the auxiliaries,
threw open the gates, sallied out upon the Persians, who did not expect
any thing of the kind, and slew those of the Persians who were seated in
chairs, and who were the principal men among them. But the rest of the
Persian army came to their assistance, and the auxiliaries, being hard
pressed, were shut up again within the citadel. But Otanes, the general,
when he saw that the Persians had suffered great loss, purposely
neglected to obey the orders which Darius had given him at his
departure, that he should neither kill nor take prisoner any of the
Samians, but deliver the island to Syloson without damage; on the
contrary, he commanded his army to put to death every one they met with,
both man and child alike. Whereupon, one part of the army besieged the
citadel, and the rest killed every one that came in their way, all they
met, as well within the temples as without. Mandrius in the meantime
sailed to Lacedmon, and carried with him all his treasures. One day
when he had set out his silver and golden cups, his servants began to
clean them; and he, at the same time, holding a conversation with
Cleomenes, son of Anaxandrides, then king of Sparta, led him on to his
house. When the king saw the cups, he was struck with wonder and
astonishment; upon which Mandrius bade him take whatever he pleased,
and when Mandrius had repeated this offer two or three times, Cleomenes
showed himself a man of the highest integrity, for he refused to accept
what was offered; and being informed that by giving to other citizens he
would gain their support, he went to the Ephori, and said that it would
be better for Sparta that this Samian stranger should quit the
Peloponnesus, lest he should persuade him or some other of the Spartans
to become base. They immediately banished Mandrius by public
proclamation. The Persians, having drawn Samos as with a net, delivered
it to Syloson, utterly destitute of inhabitants. Afterward, however,
Otanes, the general, repeopled it, in consequence of a vision in a dream.

Whilst the naval armament was on its way to Samos, the Babylonians
revolted, having very well prepared themselves. For during all the time
the magus reigned, and the seven were rising up against him, they had
made preparations for a siege, and somehow in the confusion this had
escaped observation. But when they openly revolted they resorted to this
extraordinary means of husbanding their resources: gathering together
all the women, except their mothers, and one woman apiece, besides, whom
each one chose from his own family, they strangled them; the one woman
each man selected to cook his food, and they strangled the rest, that
they might not consume their provisions. When Darius was informed of
this, he collected all his forces, and marched against Babylon. But upon
laying siege to them he found that they were not at all solicitous about
the event, for the Babylonians mounted the ramparts, and danced, and
derided Darius and his army, and cried: "Why sit ye there, Persians?
will ye not be off? It will be a long day before you will take us."

When the nineteenth month of the siege had passed, Zopyrus, son of that
Megabyzus, who was one of the seven who dethroned the magus, went to
Darius and asked him whether he deemed the taking of Babylon of very
great importance. Learning that he valued it at a high price, he went
away and inflicted on himself an irremediable mutilation, for he cut off
his nose and ears, chopped his hair in a disgraceful manner, scourged
himself, and then presented himself before Darius. The latter was very
much grieved when he beheld a man of high rank so mutilated, and
starting from his throne, he shouted aloud and asked who had mutilated
him, and for what cause. He answered: "O King, there is no man except
yourself who could have power to treat me thus; no stranger has done it,
but I myself, deeming it a great indignity that the Assyrians should
deride the Persians." "Foolish man," said Darius, "because you are
mutilated, will the enemy sooner submit? Have you lost your senses, that
you have thus ruined yourself?" "If I had communicated to you what I was
about to do," he answered, "you would not have permitted me, but now, if
you are not wanting to your own interests, we shall take Babylon. For I,
as I am, will desert to the city, and will tell them that I have been
thus treated by you; and I think that when I have persuaded them that
such is the case, I shall obtain the command of their army. Do you then,
on the tenth day after I shall have entered the city, station a thousand
men of that part of your army whose loss you would least regret over
against the gates called after Semiramis; again, on the seventh day
after the tenth, station two thousand more against the gate called from
Nineveh; and from the seventh day let an interval of twenty days elapse,
and then place four thousand more against the gate called from the
Chaldans; but let them carry no defensive arms except swords. After the
twentieth day, command the rest of the army to invest the wall on all
sides, but station the Persians for me at those called the Belidian and
Cissian gates; for, as I think, when I have performed great exploits,
the Babylonians will intrust every thing to me, and, moreover, the keys
of the gates, and then it will be mine and the Persians' care to do what
remains to be done."

[Illustration: INFANTRY DRILLED BY SERGEANT.]

Having given these injunctions, he went to the gates, turning round as
if he were really a deserter. Those who were stationed in that quarter,
seeing him from the turrets, ran down and opened one door of the gate a
little, and asked him who he was, and for what purpose he came. He told
them that he was Zopyrus, and had deserted to them: the door-keepers
then conducted him to the assembly of the Babylonians, and standing
before them he deplored his condition, saying that he had suffered from
Darius these injuries, and that he was so treated because he had advised
to raise the siege, since there appeared no means of taking the city.
"Now, therefore," he said, "I come to you, O Babylonians, as your
greatest blessing; and to Darius, his army, and the Persians, the
greatest mischief; for he shall not escape with impunity, having thus
mutilated me; and I am acquainted with all his designs." And the
Babylonians, seeing a man of distinction among the Persians deprived of
his ears and nose, and covered with stripes and blood, thoroughly
believing that he spoke the truth, and that he had come as an ally to
them, were ready to intrust him with whatever he should ask; and he,
having obtained the command of the forces, acted as he had preconcerted
with Darius; for on the tenth he led out the army of the Babylonians,
and surrounded the thousand whom he had instructed Darius to station
there, and cut them all in pieces. Then the Babylonians, perceiving that
he performed deeds such as he promised, were ready to obey him in every
thing. He then suffered the appointed number of days to elapse, and
again selected a body of Babylonians, led them out, and slaughtered the
two thousand of Darius' soldiers. The Babylonians witnessing this action
also, all had the praises of Zopyrus on their tongues. Then he again,
after the appointed number of days had elapsed, led out his troops
according to the settled plan, surrounded the four thousand, and cut
them in pieces. And when he had accomplished this, Zopyrus was every
thing to the Babylonians, and was appointed commander-in-chief and
guardian of the walls. But when Darius, according to agreement, invested
the wall all round, then Zopyrus discovered his whole treachery; for
while the Babylonians, mounting the wall, repelled the army of Darius
that was attacking them, Zopyrus opened the Cissian and Belidian gates
and led the Persians within the wall. Those of the Babylonians who saw
what was done, fled into the temple of Jupiter Belus; and those who did
not see it, remained each at his post, until they also discovered that
they had been betrayed.

[Illustration: LIGHT ARMED TROOPS MARCHING.]

Thus Babylon was taken a second time. But when Darius had made himself
master of the Babylonians, first of all, he demolished the walls and
bore away all the gates, for when Cyrus had taken Babylon before, he did
neither of these things; and secondly, Darius impaled about three
thousand of the principal citizens, and allowed the rest of the
Babylonians to inhabit the city. And that the Babylonians might have
wives to take the place of those they had strangled, Darius ordered the
neighboring provinces to send women to Babylon, taxing each at a certain
number, so that a total of fifty thousand women came together; and from
these the Babylonians of our time are descended. No Persian, in the
opinion of Darius, either of those who came after, or who lived before,
surpassed Zopyrus in great achievements, Cyrus only excepted; for with
him no Persian ever ventured to compare himself. It is also reported
that Darius frequently expressed this opinion, that he would rather
Zopyrus had not suffered such ignominious treatment than acquire twenty
Babylons in addition to that he had. And he honored him exceedingly; for
he every year presented him with those gifts which are most prized by
the Persians, and he assigned him Babylon to hold free from taxes during
his life.

[16] The Egyptian mummies could only be seen in front, the back being
covered by a box or coffin; the Ethiopian bodies could be seen all
round, as the column of glass was transparent.

[17] Epilepsy.

[18] Nearly $18,000,000 in all.

[19] That is, "southwest."




_BOOK IV. MELPOMENE._




CHAPTER I.

DESCRIPTION OF SCYTHIA AND THE NEIGHBORING NATIONS.


After the capture of Babylon, Darius made an expedition against the
Scythians, for as Asia was flourishing in men, and large revenues came
in, Darius was desirous of revenging himself upon the Scythians, because
they had formerly invaded the Median territory, and defeated in battle
those that opposed them. For the Scythians ruled over Upper Asia for
twenty-eight years. But when those Scythians returned to their own
country, after such an interval, a task no less than the invasion of
Media awaited them; for they found an army of no inconsiderable force
ready to oppose them; the wives of the Scythians, seeing their husbands
were a long time absent, had married their slaves. The Scythians deprive
all their slaves of sight for the sake of the milk which they drink,
doing as follows: when they have taken bone tubes very like flutes, they
thrust them into the veins of the mares, and blow with their mouth;
while some blow, others milk. They say they do this because the veins of
the mare, being inflated, become filled, and the udder is depressed.
When they have finished milking, they pour the milk into hollow wooden
vessels, and having placed the blind men round about the vessels, they
agitate the milk: then they skim off that which swims on the surface,
considering it the most valuable, but that which subsides is of less
value than the other. On this account the Scythians put out the eyes of
every prisoner they take; for they are not agriculturists, but feeders
of cattle. From these slaves then and the women a race of youths had
grown up, who, when they knew their own extraction, opposed those who
were returning from Media. And first they cut off the country by digging
a wide ditch, stretching from Mount Taurus to the lake Motis, which is
of great extent, and afterward encamping opposite, they came to an
engagement with the Scythians, who were endeavoring to enter. When
several battles had been fought, and the Scythians were unable to obtain
any advantage, one of them said: "Men of Scythia, what are we doing? by
fighting with our slaves not only are we ourselves by being slain
becoming fewer in number, but by killing them we shall hereafter have
fewer to rule over. So it seems to me that we should lay aside our
spears and bows, and that every one, taking a horsewhip, should go
directly to them; for so long as they saw us with arms, they considered
themselves equal to us, and born of equal birth; but when they shall see
us with our whips instead of arms, they will soon learn that they are
our slaves, and will no longer resist." The Scythians adopted the advice
on the spot; and the slaves, struck with astonishment, forgot to fight,
and fled.

As the Scythians say, theirs is the most recent of all nations. The
first man that appeared in this country, which was a wilderness, was
named Targitaus; they say that the parents of this Targitaus, in my
opinion relating what is incredible, were Jupiter and a daughter of the
river Borysthenes; and that Targitaus had three sons, who went by the
names of Lipoxais, Apovais, and Colaxais; that during their reign a
plough, a yoke, an axe, and a bowl of golden workmanship, dropping down
from heaven, fell on the Scythian territory; that the eldest, seeing
them first, approached, intending to take them up, but as he came near,
the gold began to burn; when he had retired the second went up, and it
did the same again; but when the youngest approached, the burning gold
became extinguished, and he carried the things home with him; and the
elder brothers, in consequence of this, giving way, surrendered the
whole authority to Alaxais the youngest. The Scythians reckon the whole
number of years from their beginning, from King Targitaus to the time
that Darius crossed over against them, to be just a thousand years. This
sacred gold the kings watch with the greatest care, and annually
approach it with magnificent sacrifices to render it propitious. If he
who has the sacred gold happens to fall asleep in the open air on the
festival, the Scythians say he cannot survive the year, and on this
account they give him as much land as he can ride round on horseback in
one day. The country being very extensive, Colaxais established three of
the kingdoms for his sons, and made that one the largest in which the
gold is kept. The parts beyond the north of the inhabited districts the
Scythians say can neither be seen nor passed through, by reason of the
feathers shed there; for the earth and air are so full of feathers that
the view is intercepted. With respect to these feathers I entertain the
following opinion: in the upper parts of this country it continually
snows, less in summer than in winter, as is reasonable; now, whoever has
seen snow falling thick near him, will know what I mean; for snow is
like feathers; and on account of the winter being so severe, the
northern parts of this continent are uninhabited.

Such is the account the Scythians give of themselves, and of the country
above them; but the Greeks who inhabit Pontus give the following
account: they say that Hercules, as he was driving away the herds of
Geryon, arrived in this country, which was then a desert, and that
Geryon, fixing his abode outside the Pontus, inhabited the island which
the Greeks call Erythia, situated near Gades, beyond the columns of
Hercules in the ocean. The ocean, they say, beginning from the sunrise,
flows round the whole earth, that Hercules thence came to the country
now called Scythia, and as a storm and frost overtook him, he drew his
lion's skin over him, and went to sleep; and in the meanwhile, his
mares, which were feeding apart from his chariot, vanished by some
divine chance. They add that when Hercules awoke, he sought for them;
and that having gone over the whole country, he at length came to the
land called Hyla; there he found a monster, having two natures, half
virgin, half viper, of which the upper parts resembled a woman, and the
lower parts a serpent: in astonishment he asked her if she had anywhere
seen his strayed mares. She said that she herself had them, and would
not restore them to him unless he would make her his wife. Hercules
agreed. She, however, delayed giving back the mares, out of a desire to
detain Hercules as long as she could; but as he was desirous of
recovering them and departing, she at last restored the mares, saying:
"These mares that strayed hither I preserved for you, but now that you
will go away and leave me, tell me what I must do with our three sons
when they are grown up; shall I establish them here, for I possess the
rule over this country, or shall I send them to you?" He replied: "When
you see the children arrived at the age of men, you cannot err if you do
this: whichever of them you see able thus to bend this bow, and thus
girding himself with this girdle, make him an inhabitant of this
country; and whichever fails in these tasks which I enjoin, send out of
the country. If you do this you will please yourself and do wisely."
Then having drawn out one of his bows, for Hercules carried two at that
time, and having shown her the belt, he gave her both the bow and the
belt, which had a golden cup at the extremity of the clasp, and
departed. When the sons had attained to the age of men she gave them
names; to the first, Agathyrsis, to the second, Gelonus, and to the
youngest, Scythes; and, in the next place, she did what had been
enjoined; and two of her sons, Agathyrsis and Gelonus, being unable to
come up to the proposed task, left the country, being expelled by their
mother; but the youngest of them, Scythes, having accomplished it,
remained there. From this Scythes, son of Hercules, are descended those
who have been successively kings of the Scythians; and from the cup, the
Scythians even to this day wear cups hung from their belts.

Aristeas, of Proconnesus, says in his epic verses, that, inspired by
Apollo, he came to the Issedones; that beyond the Issedones dwell the
Arimaspians, a people that have only one eye; beyond them the
gold-guarding griffins; and beyond these the Hyperboreans, who reach to
the sea: that all these, except the Hyperboreans, beginning from the
Arimaspians, continually encroached upon their neighbors; that the
Issedones were expelled from their country by the Arimaspians, the
Scythians by the Issedones, and that the Cimmerians, who inhabited on
the South Sea, being pressed by the Scythians, abandoned their country.

No one knows with certainty what is beyond the country about which this
account speaks. But as far as we have been able to arrive at the truth
with accuracy from hearsay, the whole shall be related. From the port of
the Borysthenit, for this is the most central part of the sea-coast of
all Scythia, the first people are the Callipid, being Greek-Scythians;
beyond these is another nation called Alazones. These and the Callipid,
in other respects, follow the usages, of the Scythians, but they both
sow and feed on wheat, onions, garlic, lentils, and millet; but beyond
the Alazones dwell husbandmen, who do not sow wheat for food but for
sale. Beyond these the Neuri dwell; and to the north of the Neuri the
country is utterly uninhabited, as far as I know. These nations are by
the side of the river Hypanis, to the west of the Borysthenes. But if
one crosses the Borysthenes, the first country from the sea is Hyla;
and from this higher up live Scythian agriculturists, where the Greeks
settled on the river Hypanis. These Scythian husbandmen occupy the
country eastward, for three days' journey, extending to the river whose
name is Panticapes; and northward a passage of eleven days up the
Borysthenes. Beyond this region the country is a desert for a great
distance; and beyond the desert Androphagi dwell, who are a distinct
people, not in any respect Scythian. Beyond this is really desert, and
no nation of men is found there, as far as we know. The country eastward
of these Scythian agriculturists, when one crosses the river Panticapes,
nomads occupy, who neither sow at all nor plough; and all this country
is destitute of trees except Hyla. The nomads occupy a tract eastward
for fourteen days' journey, stretching to the river Gerrhus. Beyond the
Gerrhus are the parts called the Royal, and the most valiant and
numerous of the Scythians, who deem all other Scythians to be their
slaves. These extend southward to Taurica, and eastward to the trench,
which those sprung from the blind men dug, and to the port on the lake
Motis, which is called Cremni, and some of them reach to the river
Tanais. The parts above to the north of the Royal Scythians, the
Melanchlni inhabit, a distinct race, and not Scythian. But above the
Melanchlni are lakes, and an uninhabited desert, as far as we know.

After one crosses the river Tanais, it is no longer Scythian, but the
first region belongs to the Sauromat, who, beginning from the recess of
the lake Motis, occupy the country northward, for a fifteen days'
journey, all destitute both of wild and cultivated trees. Above these
dwell the Budini, occupying the second region, and possessing a country
thickly covered with all sorts of trees. Above the Budini, toward the
north, there is first a desert of seven days' journey, and next to the
desert, if one turns somewhat toward the east, dwell the Thyssaget, a
numerous and distinct race, and they live by hunting. Contiguous to
these, in the same regions, dwell those who are called Iyrc, who also
live by hunting in the following manner: the huntsman, having climbed a
tree, lies in ambush (and the whole country is thickly wooded), and each
man has a horse ready taught to lie on his belly, that he may not be
much above the ground, and a dog besides. When he sees any game from the
tree, having let fly an arrow, he mounts his horse, and goes in pursuit,
and the dog keeps close to him. Above these, as one bends toward the
east, dwell other Scythians, who revolted from the Royal Scythians, and
so came to this country. As far as the territory of these Scythians, the
whole country that has been described is level and deep-soiled; but
after this it is stony and rugged. When one has passed through a
considerable extent of the rugged country, a people are found living at
the foot of lofty mountains, who are said to be all bald from their
birth, both men and women, and are flat-nosed, and have large chins;
they speak a peculiar language, wear the Scythian costume, and live on
the fruit of a tree; the name of the tree on which they live is called
ponticon, and is about the size of a figtree; it bears fruit like a
bean, and has a stone. When this is ripe they strain it through a cloth,
and a thick and black liquor flows from it, to which they give the name
of aschy; this they suck, and drink mingled with milk; from the thick
sediment of the pulp they make cakes to eat, for they have not many
cattle in these parts, as the pastures there are not good. Every man
lives under a tree, which, in the winter, he covers with a thick white
woollen covering. No man does any injury to this people, for they are
accounted sacred; nor do they possess any warlike weapon. They determine
by arbitration the differences that arise among their neighbors; and
whoever takes refuge among them is injured by no one. They are called
Argippi.

As far, then, as these bald people, our knowledge respecting the country
and the nations before them is very good, for some Scythians frequently
go there from whom it is not difficult to obtain information, as well as
some Greeks belonging to the ports in Pontus. The Scythians who go to
them transact business by means of seven interpreters and seven
languages, but beyond the bald men no one can speak with certainty, for
lofty and impassable mountains form their boundary, which no one has
ever crossed; but these bald men say, what to me is incredible, that men
with goats' feet inhabit these mountains; and when one has passed beyond
them, other men are found, who sleep six months at a time, but this I do
not at all admit. However, the country eastward of the bald men is well
known, being inhabited by Issedones, who are said to observe this
extraordinary custom. When a man's father dies all his relations bring
cattle, which they sacrifice, and, having cut up the flesh, they cut up
also the dead parent of their host, and mingling all the flesh together,
they spread out a banquet; then making bare and cleansing his head they
gild it; and afterward treat it as a sacred image, performing grand
annual sacrifices to it. A son does this to his father, as the Greeks
celebrate the anniversary of their father's death. These people are
likewise accounted just; and the women have equal authority with the men.

Above them, the Issedones affirm, are the men with only one eye, and the
gold-guarding griffins. The Scythians repeat this account, having
received it from them; and we have adopted it from the Scythians, and
call them in the Scythian language, Arimaspi; for _Arima_, in the
Scythian language, signifies one, and _Spou_, the eye. All this country
which I have been speaking of is subject to such a severe winter, that
for eight months the frost is intolerable, so that if you pour water on
the ground you will not make mud, but if you light a fire you will. Even
the sea freezes, and the whole Cimmerian Bosphorus; and the Scythians
who live within the trench lead their armies and drive their chariots
over the ice to the Sindians, on the other side. Thus winter continues
eight months, and even during the other four it is cold there. And this
winter is different in character from the winters in all other
countries; for in this no rain worth mentioning falls in the usual
season, but during the summer it never leaves off raining. At the time
when there is thunder elsewhere there is none there, but in summer it is
violent: if there should be thunder in winter, it is counted a prodigy
to be wondered at. So, should there be an earthquake, whether in summer
or winter, in Scythia it is accounted a prodigy. Their horses endure
this cold, but asses and mules cannot endure it at all; whereas in other
places in the world horses that stand exposed to frost become
frost-bitten and waste away, but asses and mules endure it. On this
account also the race of beeves appears to me to be defective there, and
not to have horns; and the following verse of Homer, in his Odyssey,
confirms my opinion: "And Libya, where the lambs soon put forth their
horns," rightly observing, that in warm climates horns shoot out
quickly; but in very severe cold, the cattle do not produce them at all,
or with difficulty. Concerning the Hyperboreans, I do not relate the
story of Abaris, who was said to have carried an arrow round the whole
earth without eating any thing. But I smile when I see many persons
describing the circumference of the earth, who have no sound reason to
guide them; they describe the ocean as flowing around the earth, which
is made circular as if by a lathe, and make Asia equal to Europe.

In length Europe extends along both Libya and Asia, but in respect to
width, it is evidently much larger. Libya shows itself to be surrounded
by water, except so much of it as borders upon Asia. Neco, King of
Egypt, was the first whom we know of that proved this; when he had
ceased digging the canal leading from the Nile to the Arabian Gulf, he
sent certain Phnicians in ships, with orders to sail back through the
pillars of Hercules into the Mediterranean Sea, and so return to Egypt.
The Phnicians accordingly, setting out from the Red Sea, navigated the
southern sea; when autumn came they went ashore and sowed the land, by
whatever part of Libya they happened to be sailing, and waited for
harvest; then having reaped the corn, they put to sea again. When two
years had thus passed, in the third they doubled the pillars of
Hercules, arrived in Egypt, and related what to me does not seem
credible, but may to others, that as they sailed round Libya, they had
the sun on their right hand.[20] Ever since that the Carthaginians say
that Libya is surrounded by water.

A great part of Asia was explored under the direction of Darius. Being
desirous to know where the Indus, which is the second river that
produces crocodiles, discharges itself into the sea, he sent in ships
Scylax of Caryanda and others on whom he could rely to make a true
report. They accordingly set out from the city of Caspatyrus, sailed
down the river toward the sunrise to the sea; then sailing on the sea
westward, they arrived in the thirtieth month at that place where the
king of Egypt despatched the Phnicians, whom I before mentioned, to
sail round Libya. After this Darius subdued the Indians, and frequented
this sea. Thus the other parts of Asia, except toward the rising sun,
are found to exhibit things similar to Libya.

Whether Europe is surrounded by water either toward the east or toward
the north, has not been fully discovered by any man; but in length it is
known to extend beyond both the other continents. Nor can I conjecture
for what reason three different names have been given to the earth,
which is but one, and why those should be derived from the names of
women, Libya is said by most of the Greeks to take its name from a
native woman of the name of Libya; and Asia, from the wife of
Prometheus. But the Lydians claim this name, saying that Asia was so
called after Asius, son of Cotys, son of Manes, and not after Asia the
wife of Prometheus; from whom also a tribe in Sardis is called the Asian
tribe; nor is it clear whence Europe received its name, nor who gave it,
unless we say that the region received the name from the Tyrian Europa:
yet she evidently belonged to Asia, and never came into the country
which is now called Europe by the Greeks.

The Euxine Sea exhibits the most ignorant nations: for we are unable to
mention any one nation of those on this side the Pontus that has any
pretensions to intelligence; nor have we ever heard of any learned man
among them, except the Scythian nation and Anacharsis. By the Scythian
nation one of the most important of human devices has been contrived
more wisely than by any others whom we know; their other customs,
however, I do not admire. This device has been contrived so that no one
who attacks them can escape; and that, if they do not choose to be
found, no one is able to overtake them. For they have neither cities nor
fortifications, but carry their houses with them; they are all
equestrian archers, living not from the cultivation of the earth, but
from cattle, and their dwellings are wagons,how must not such a people
be invincible, and difficult to engage with? The country and the rivers
aid them: for the country, being level, abounds in herbage and is well
watered; and rivers flow through it almost as numerous as the canals in
Egypt. The Ister, which is the greatest of all the rivers we know, flows
always with an equal stream both in summer and winter, and has five
mouths.

In each district of the Scythians, in the place where the magistrates
assemble, is erected a structure sacred to Mars, of the following kind.
Bundles of faggots are heaped up to the length and breadth of three
stades, but less in height; on the top of this a square platform is
formed; and three of the sides are perpendicular, but on the fourth it
is accessible. Every year they heap on it one hundred and fifty
wagon-loads of faggots, for it is continually sinking by reason of the
weather. On this heap an old iron scimetar is placed by each tribe, and
this is the image of Mars; they bring yearly sacrifices of cattle and
horses; and to these _scimetars_ they offer more sacrifices than to the
rest of the gods. Whatever enemies they take alive, of these they
sacrifice one in a hundred, not in the same manner as they do the
cattle, but in a different manner; for after they have poured a libation
of wine on their heads, they cut the throats of the men over a bowl;
then having carried _the bowl_ on the heap of faggots, they pour the
blood over the scimetar. Below at the sacred precinct, they do as
follows: having cut off all the right shoulders of the men that have
been killed, with the arms, they throw them into the air; and then,
having finished the rest of the sacrificial rites, they depart; but the
arm lies wherever it has fallen, and the body apart. Swine they never
use, nor suffer them to be used in their country at all.

When a Scythian overthrows his first enemy, he drinks his blood; and
presents the king with the heads of the enemies he has killed in battle;
for if he brings a head, he shares the booty that they take; but not, if
he does not bring one. He skins it in the following manner. Having made
a circular incision round the ears and taking hold of the skin, he
shakes it from the skull; then having scraped off the flesh with the rib
of an ox, he softens the skin with his hands, makes it supple, and uses
it as a napkin; each man hangs it on the bridle of the horse which he
rides, and prides himself on it; for whoever has the greatest number of
these skin napkins is accounted the most valiant man. Many of them make
cloaks of these skins, to throw over themselves, sewing them together
like shepherd's coats; and many, having flayed the right hands of their
enemies that are dead, together with the nails, make coverings for their
quivers; the skin of a man, which is both thick and shining, surpasses
almost all other skins in the brightness of its white. Many, having
flayed men whole, and stretched the skin on wood, carry it about on
horseback. The heads themselves, not indeed of all, but of their
greatest enemies, they treat as follows: each, having sawn off all below
the eye-brows, cleanses it, and if the man is poor, he covers only the
outside with leather, and so uses it; but if he is rich, he covers it
with leather, and gilds the inside, and so uses it for a drinking-cup.
They do this also to their relatives, if they are at variance, and one
prevails over another in the presence of the king. When strangers of
consideration come to him, he produces these heads, and relates how,
though they were his relatives, they made war against him, and he
overcame them, considering this a proof of bravery. Once in every year,
the governor of a district, each in his own district, mingles a bowl of
wine, from which those Scythians drink by whom enemies have been
captured; but they who have not achieved this, do not taste of this
wine, but sit at a distance in dishonor; this is accounted the greatest
disgrace: such of them as have killed very many men, having two cups at
once, drink them together.

Soothsayers among the Scythians are numerous, who divine by the help of
a number of willow rods, in the following manner. They lay large bundles
of twigs on the ground and untie them; and having placed each rod apart,
they utter their predictions; and whilst they are pronouncing them, they
gather up the rods again, and put them together again one by one. This
is their national mode of divination. But the Enarees, or Androgyni, say
that Venus gave them the power of divining by means of the bark of a
linden tree: when a man has split the linden-tree in three pieces,
twisting it round his own fingers, and then untwisting it, he utters a
response.

When the king of the Scythians is sick, he sends for three of the most
famous of the prophets, who prophesy in the manner above mentioned. When
any of these prophets are proved to have sworn falsely, they put them to
death in the following manner: they fill a wagon with faggots, and yoke
oxen to it, then tie the feet of the prophets, bind their hands behind
them, gag them, and enclose them in the midst of the faggots; then
having set fire to them, they terrify the oxen, and let them go. Many
oxen are burnt with the prophets, and many escape very much scorched,
when the pole has been burnt asunder. Of the children of those whom he
puts to death, the king kills all the males, but does not hurt the
females.

The sepulchres of the kings are in the country of the Gerrhi. There,
when their king dies, they dig a large square hole in the ground, to
receive the corpse. Then, having the body covered with wax, the belly
opened and cleaned, filled with bruised cypress, incense, parsley and
anise-seed, and sewn up again, they carry it in a chariot to another
nation; those who receive the corpse, brought to them, do the same as
the Royal Scythians; they cut off part of their ear, shave off their
hair, wound themselves on the arms, lacerate their forehead and nose,
and drive arrows through their left hand. Thence they carry the corpse
of the king to another nation whom they govern; and those to whom they
first came accompany them. When they have carried the corpse round all
the provinces, they arrive at the sepulchres among the Gerrhi, who are
the most remote of the nations they rule over. Then, when they have
placed the corpse in the grave on a bed of leaves, having fixed spears
on each side of the dead body, they lay pieces of wood over it, and
cover it over with mats. In the remaining space of the grave they bury
one of the king's wives, having strangled her, and his cup-bearer, a
cook, a groom, a page, a courier, and horses, and firstlings of
everything else, and golden goblets; they make no use of silver or
bronze. Then they all heap up a large mound, vieing with each other to
make it as large as possible. At the expiration of a year, they take the
most fitting of his remaining servants, all native Scythians; for
whomsoever the king may order serve him, and they have no servants
bought with money. Now when they have strangled fifty of these servants,
and fifty of the finest horses, they take out their bowels, cleanse
them, fill them with chaff, and sew them up again. Then placing the half
of a wheel, with its concave side uppermost, on two pieces of wood, and
the other half on two other pieces of wood, and preparing many of these
in the same manner, they thrust thick pieces of wood through the horses
lengthwise, up to the neck, mount them on the half-wheels; the foremost
part of the half-wheels supporting the shoulders of the horses, and the
hinder part the belly near the thighs, while the legs on both sides are
suspended in the air; then, having put bridles and bits on the horses,
they stretch them in front, and fasten them to a stake; they then mount
upon each horse one of the fifty young men that have been strangled.
They drive a straight piece of wood along the spine as far as the neck,
and a part of this wood which projects from the bottom they fix into a
hole bored in the other piece of wood that passes through the horse. The
horsemen are then placed round the monument, and they depart.

When the other Scythians die, their nearest relations carry them about
among their friends, laid in chariots; each one receives and entertains
the attendants, and sets the same things before the dead body, as before
the rest. In this manner private persons are carried about for forty
days, and then buried. After the burial the Scythians purify themselves
by wiping and thoroughly washing their heads and bodies. They set up
three pieces of wood leaning against each other, extend around them
woollen cloths; and having joined them together as closely as possible,
they throw red-hot stones into a vessel placed in the middle of the
pieces of wood and the cloths. They have a sort of hemp growing in this
country, much like flax, except in thickness and height; in this respect
the hemp is far superior: it grows both spontaneously and from
cultivation; and from it the Thracians make garments like linen, nor
would any one who is not well skilled in such matters distinguish
whether they are made of flax or hemp, but a person who has never seen
this hemp would think the garment was made of flax. The Scythians take
seed of this hemp, creep under the cloths, and put the seed on the
red-hot stones; this smokes, and produces such a steam, as no Grecian
vapor-bath could surpass. Transported with vapor, they shout aloud; and
this serves them instead of washing, for they never bathe the body in
water. Their women pound on a rough stone pieces of cypress, cedar, and
incense-tree, pouring on water; and then this pounded matter, when it is
thick, they smear over the whole body and face. This at the same time
gives them an agreeable odor, and when they take off the cataplasm on
the following day, they become clean and shining.

I have never been able to learn with accuracy the amount of the
population of the Scythians. There is a spot between the river
Borysthenes and the Hypanis, called Exampus, containing a fountain of
bitter water, which renders the Hypanis unfit to be drunk. In this spot
lies a bronze cauldron, in size six times as large as the bowl at the
mouth of the Pontus, which Pausanias, son of Cleombrotus, dedicated. For
the benefit of any one who has never seen this, I will describe it: The
cauldron easily contains six hundred amphor; and is six fingers in
thickness. The inhabitants say that it was made from the points of
arrows; for their king, Ariantas, wishing to know the population of the
Scythians, commanded the Scythians to bring him each one point of an
arrow, and threatened death on whosoever should fail to bring it.
Accordingly, a vast number of arrow points were brought, and resolving
to leave a monument made from them, he made this bronze bowl, and
dedicated it at Exampus. Their country has nothing wonderful, except
the rivers, which are very large and very many in number, and the
extensive plains. They show the print of the foot of Hercules upon a
rock near the river Tyras; it resembles the footstep of man, and is two
cubits in length.




CHAPTER II.

INVASION OF SCYTHIA BY DARIUS.


Whilst Darius was making preparations against the Scythians, and sending
messages to command some to contribute land forces, and others a fleet,
and others to bridge over the Thracian Bosphorus, Artabanus, the son of
Hystaspes, and brother of Darius, entreated him on no account to make an
expedition against the Scythians, representing the poverty of Scythia;
but he could not persuade him. At that time obazus, a Persian, who had
three sons all serving in the army, besought Darius that one might be
left at home for him. The king answered him, as a friend, and one who
had made a moderate request, that he would leave him all his sons; he
therefore was exceedingly delighted, hoping that his sons would be
discharged from the army. But at Darius' command the proper officers put
all the sons of obazus to death, and left them on the spot.

When Darius, marching from Susa, reached Chalcedon on the Bosphorus, a
bridge was already laid across. There, sitting in the temple, he took a
view of the Euxine Sea, which is worthy of admiration, for of all seas
it is by nature the most wonderful.

Darius, pleased with the bridge, presented its architect, Mandrocles the
Samian, with ten of every thing, and he painted a picture of the whole
junction of the Bosphorus, with King Darius seated on a throne, and his
army crossing over, and dedicated it as first fruits in the temple of
Juno.

When Darius reached the river Tearus he was so delighted with it that he
erected a pillar with this inscription: THE SPRINGS OF THE TEARUS
YIELD THE BEST AND FINEST WATER OF ALL RIVERS; AND A MAN, THE BEST AND
FINEST OF ALL MEN, CAME TO THEM, LEADING AN ARMY AGAINST THE SCYTHIANS,
DARIUS, SON OF HYSTASPES, KING OF THE PERSIANS, AND OF THE WHOLE
CONTINENT.

Before he reached the Ister, he subdued the Get, who think themselves
immortal, supposing that they themselves do not die, but that the
deceased go to the deity Zalmoxis. Every fifth year they dispatch one of
themselves, taken by lot, to Zalmoxis, with orders to let him know on
each occasion what they want. Their mode of sending him is this. Some
who are appointed hold three javelins; whilst others take up the man who
is to be sent to Zalmoxis by the hands and feet, swing him round, and
throw him into the air, upon the points. If he is transfixed and dies,
they think the god is propitious to them; if he does not die, they blame
the messenger himself, saying that he is a bad man, and dispatch another.

When Darius and his land forces reached the Ister and all had crossed,
Coes, general of the Mitylenians, advised the king to let the bridge
remain over it, leaving the men who constructed it as its guard. "Not,"
said he, "that I am at all afraid that we shall be conquered in battle
by the Scythians, but rather that, being unable to find them, we may
suffer somewhat in our wanderings." "Lesbian friend," replied Darius,
"when I am safe back in my own palace, fail not to present yourself to
me, that I may requite you for good advice with good deeds." Tying sixty
knots in a thong, he summoned the Ionian commanders to his presence, and
said: "Men of Ionia, I have changed my resolution concerning the bridge;
so take this thong, and as soon as you see me march against the
Scythians, untie one of these knots every day; and if I return not until
the days numbered by the knots have passed, sail away to your own
country. Till that time, since I have changed my determination, guard
the bridge, and apply the utmost care to preserve and secure it."

The Scythians determined to fight no battle in the open field, because
their allies did not come to their assistance; but to retreat and draw
off covertly, and fill up the wells and the springs as they passed by,
and destroy the herbage on the ground. They sent forward the best of
their cavalry as an advanced guard; but the wagons, in which all their
children and wives lived, they left behind.

Advancing with his army as quick as possible, he fell in with the
Scythian divisions and pursued them, but they kept a day's march before
him. The Scythians, for Darius did not relax his pursuit, fled, as had
been determined, toward those nations that had refused to assist them.
When this had continued for a considerable time, Darius sent a horseman
to Indathyrsus, king of the Scythians, with the following message: "Most
miserable of men, why dost thou continually fly, when it is in thy power
to do one of these two other things? For if thou thinkest thou art able
to resist my power, stand, and having ceased thy wanderings, fight; but
if thou art conscious of thy inferiority, in that case also cease thy
hurried march, and bringing earth and water as presents to thy master,
come to a conference." To this Indathyrsus, the king of the Scythians,
answered: "This is the case with me, O Persian; I never yet fled from
any man out of fear, nor do I now so flee from thee; nor have I done any
thing different now from what I am wont to do, even in time of peace;
but why I do not forthwith fight thee, I will explain. We have no cities
nor cultivated lands, for which we are under any apprehension lest they
should be taken or ravaged. Yet, if it is by all means necessary to come
to battle at once, we have the sepulchres of our ancestors, come, find
these, and attempt to disturb them, then you will know whether we will
fight for our sepulchres or not; but before that, unless we choose, we
will not engage with thee. The only masters I acknowledge are Jupiter my
progenitor, and Vesta, queen of the Scythians; but to thee, instead of
presents of earth and water, I will send such presents as are proper to
come to thee. And in answer to thy boast, that thou art my master, I bid
thee weep." (This is a Scythian saying.) The herald therefore departed
carrying this answer to Darius.

When the kings of the Scythians heard the name of servitude, they were
filled with indignation; whereupon they sent the division united with
the Sauromat, which Scopasis commanded, with orders to confer with the
Ionians, who guarded the bridge over the Ister. Those who were left
resolved no longer to lead the Persians about, but to attack them
whenever they were taking their meals; accordingly, observing the
soldiers of Darius taking their meals, they put their design in
execution. The Scythian cavalry always routed the Persian cavalry, but
the Persian horsemen in their flight fell back on the infantry, and the
infantry supported them. The Scythians, having beaten back the cavalry,
wheeled around through fear of the infantry. A very remarkable
circumstance, that was advantageous to the Persians and adverse to the
Scythians, when they attacked the camp of Darius, was the braying of the
asses and the appearance of the mules, for Scythia produces neither ass
nor mule; there is not in the whole Scythian territory a single ass or
mule, by reason of cold. The asses, then, growing playful, put the
Scythian horses into confusion; and frequently, as they were advancing
upon the Persians, when the horses heard, midway, the braying of the
asses, they wheeled round in confusion, and were greatly amazed,
pricking up their ears, as having never before heard such a sound, nor
seen such a shape; and this circumstance in some slight degree affected
the fortune of the war.

When the Scythians saw the Persians in great commotion, to detain them
longer in Scythia they left some of their own cattle in the care of the
herdsmen and withdrew to another spot; and the Persians coming up, took
the cattle and exulted in what they had done. When this had happened
several times, Darius at last was in a great strait, and the kings of
the Scythians, having ascertained this, sent a herald, bearing as gifts
to Darius, a bird, a mouse, a frog, and five arrows. The Persians asked
the bearer of the gifts the meaning of this present; but he answered
that he had no other orders than to deliver them and return immediately;
and he advised the Persians, if they were wise, to discover what the
gifts meant. Darius' opinion was that the Scythians meant to give
themselves up to him, as well as earth and water; forming his conjecture
thus: since a mouse is bred in the earth, and subsists on the same food
as a man; a frog lives in the water; a bird is very like a horse; and
the arrows they deliver up as their whole strength. But Gobryas, one of
the seven who had deposed the magus, did not coincide with this; he
conjectured that the presents intimated: "Unless, O Persians, ye become
birds and fly into the air, or become mice and hide yourselves beneath
the earth, or become frogs and leap into the lakes, ye shall never
return home again, but be stricken by these arrows." And thus the other
Persians interpreted the gifts.

The rest of the Scythians, after they had sent the presents to Darius,
drew themselves up opposite the Persians with their foot and horse, as
if they intended to come to an engagement; and as the Scythians were
standing in their ranks, a hare started in the midst of them; and each
went in pursuit of it. The Scythians being in great confusion, and
shouting loudly, Darius asked the meaning of the uproar in the enemy's
ranks; but when he heard that they were pursuing a hare, he said to
those he was accustomed to address on such occasions: "These men treat
us with great contempt; and I am convinced that Gobryas spoke rightly
concerning the Scythian presents. I feel that we have need of the best
advice, how our return home may be effected in safety." To this Gobryas
answered: "O king, I was in some measure acquainted by report with these
men; but I have learned much more since I came hither, and seen how they
make sport of us. My opinion is, that as soon as night draws on we
should light fires, as we are accustomed to do, and having deceived and
left behind those soldiers who are least able to bear hardships, and
having tethered all the asses, should depart before the Scythians direct
their march to the Ister, for the purpose of destroying the bridge, or
the Ionians take any resolution which may occasion our ruin." Darius
acted on this opinion: the infirm amongst the soldiers, and those whose
loss would be of the least consequence, he left on the spot in the camp.
And he left the asses, that they might make a noise; and the men were
left on this pretext, that he with the strength of his army was about to
attack the Scythians, and they, during that time, would defend the camp.
So Darius laid these injunctions on those he was preparing to abandon,
caused the fires to be lighted, and marched away with all speed toward
the Ister. The asses, deserted by the multitude, began to bray much
louder than usual; so that the Scythians, hearing them, supposed of
course that the Persians were still at their station. When day appeared,
the men that were abandoned, discovering that they had been betrayed by
Darius, extended their hands to the Scythians, and told them what had
occurred; when they heard this the divisions of the Scythians joined
forces as quickly as possible and pursued the Persians straight toward
the Ister. But as a great part of the Persian army consisted of
infantry, and they did not know the way, there being no roads cut, and
as the Scythian army consisted of cavalry, and knew the shortest route,
they missed each other, and the Scythians arrived at the bridge much
before the Persians. Finding that the Persians were not yet arrived,
they spoke to the Ionians who were on board the ships in these terms:
"Men of Ionia, the number of days appointed for your stay is already
passed, and you do not as you ought in continuing here; but if you
remained before through fear, now break up the passage and depart as
quickly as possible, rejoicing that you are free, and give thanks to the
gods and the Scythians. As for the man who before was your master, we
will so deal with him that he shall never hereafter make war on any
people."

Upon this the Ionians held a consultation. The opinion of Miltiades the
Athenian, who commanded and reigned over the Chersonesites on the
Hellespont, was, that they should comply with the request of the
Scythians, and restore liberty to Ionia. But Histius the Milesian was
of a contrary opinion, and said, "that every one reigned over his own
city through Darius; and if Darius' power should be destroyed, neither
would he himself continue master of Miletus, nor any of the rest of
other places; because every one of the cities would choose to be
governed rather by a democracy than a tyranny." Histius had no sooner
delivered this opinion, than all went over to his side, who had before
assented to that of Miltiades. Approving of the opinion of Histius,
they determined to add to it the following acts and words. To break up
the bridge on the Scythian side, as far as a bow-shot might reach, that
they might seem to do something, when in effect they did nothing; and
that the Scythians might not attempt to use violence and purpose to
cross the Ister by the bridge; and to say, while they were breaking up
the bridge on the Scythian side, they would do every thing that might be
agreeable to the Scythians. And, Histius delivered the answer in the
name of all, saying as follows: "Men of Scythia, you have brought us
good advice, and urge it seasonably; you, on your part, have pointed out
the right way to us, and we on ours readily submit to you; for, as you
see, we are breaking up the passage, and will use all diligence,
desiring to be free. But while we are breaking it up, it is fitting you
should seek for them, and having found them, avenge us and yourselves on
them, as they deserve." The Scythians, believing a second time that the
Ionians were sincere, turned back to seek the Persians; but entirely
missed the way they had taken. The Scythians themselves were the cause
of this, as they had destroyed the pastures for the horses in this
direction, and filled in the wells; for if they had not done this, they
might easily have found the Persians; but now they erred in the very
thing which they thought they had contrived for the best. For the
Scythians sought the enemy by traversing those parts of the country
where there was forage and water for the horses, thinking that they too
would make their retreat by that way. But the Persians carefully
observing their former track, returned by it, and thus with difficulty
found the passage. As they arrived in the night, and perceived the
bridge broken off, they fell into the utmost consternation, lest the
Ionians had abandoned them. There was with Darius an Egyptian, who had
an exceedingly loud voice. This man Darius commanded to stand on the
bank of the Ister, and called Histius the Milesian. He did so, and
Histius, having heard the first shout, brought up all the ships to
carry the army across, and joined the bridge. Thus the Persians escaped.




CHAPTER III.

DESCRIPTION OF LIBYA.


Beginning from Egypt the Adrymachid are the first of the Libyans we
meet with: they for the most part observe the usages of Egypt, but they
wear the same dress as the other Libyans. The women wear a chain of
bronze on each leg, and allow their hair to grow long. Next to these are
the Giligamm, who occupy the country westward, as far as the island
Aphrodisias. Midway on this coast the island of Platea is situated,
which the Cyrenans colonized. The Asbyst adjoin the Giligamm
westward; they inhabit the country above Cyrene, but do not reach to the
sea; for the Cyrenans occupy the sea-coast. They drive four-horsed
chariots, more than any of the Libyans, and endeavor to imitate most of
the customs of the Cyrenans. The Nasamones, a very numerous people,
live to the westward. In summer they leave their cattle on the coast,
and go up to the region of Augila, in order to gather the fruit of the
palm-trees, which grow in great numbers to a large size, and are all
productive. They catch locusts, dry them in the sun, reduce them to
powder, and sprinkling them in milk, drink them. In their oaths and
divinations they swear, laying their hands on the sepulchres of those
who are generally esteemed to have been the most just and excellent
persons among them; and they divine, going to the tombs of their
ancestors, and after having prayed, they lie down to sleep, and whatever
dream they have, they avail themselves of. In pledging their faith, each
party gives the other to drink out of his hand, and drinks in turn from
the other's hand; and if they have no liquid, they take up some dust
from the ground and lick it.

Above these to the north, in a country abounding with wild beasts, live
the Garamantes, who avoid all men and the society of any others; they do
not possess any warlike weapon, nor do they know how to defend
themselves. The Mac adjoin them on the sea-coast, westward; these shave
their heads so as to leave a tuft, and allowing the middle hair to grow,
keep both sides shaved close to the skin; in war they wear the skins of
ostriches for defensive armor. The river Cinyps, flowing through their
country from a hill called the Graces, discharges itself into the sea.
This hill of the Graces is thickly covered with trees, though all the
rest of Libya is bare. From the sea to this hill is a distance of two
hundred stades. The Lotophagi occupy the coast that projects to the sea
in front; they subsist only on the fruit of the lotus, which is equal in
size to the mastic berry, and in sweetness resembles the fruit of the
palm-tree. The Lotophagi make wine also from this fruit.

The Machlyes, who also use the lotus, but in a less degree than those
before mentioned, adjoin the Lotophagi on the sea-coast. They extend as
far as a large river called Triton, which discharges itself into the
great lake Tritonis; and in it is an island named Phla. They say that
the Lacedmonians were commanded by an oracle to colonize this island.
The following story is also told: that Jason, when the building of the
Argo was finished at the foot of Mount Pelion, having put a hecatomb on
board, and a bronze tripod, sailed round the Peloponnesus, purposing to
go to Delphi; and as he was sailing off Malea, a north wind caught him
and drove him to Libya; and before he could descern the land, he found
himself in the shallows of the lake Tritonis; and as he was in doubt how
to extricate his ship, the story goes that a Triton appeared to him, and
bade Jason give him the tripod, promising that he would show them the
passage, and conduct them away in safety. Jason consented, and the
Triton showed them the passage out of the shallows, and placed the
tripod in his own temple; then pronouncing an oracle from the tripod, he
declared to Jason and his companions all that should happen,that "when
one of the descendants of those who sailed with him in the Argo should
carry away the tripod, then it was fated that a hundred Grecian cities
should be built about the lake Tritonis." The neighboring nations of the
Libyans, when they heard this, concealed the tripods. The Auses adjoin
these Machlyes; they, as well as the Machlyes, dwell round the lake
Tritonis, and the Triton forms the boundary between them. The Machlyes
let the hair grow on the back of the head, and the Auses on the front.
At the annual festival of Minerva, their virgins, dividing themselves
into two companies, fight together with stones and staves, affirming
that they perform the ancient rites to their native goddess, whom we
call Minerva; and those of the virgins who die from their wounds they
call false virgins. But before they leave off fighting, they, with one
consent, deck the maiden that excels in beauty, with a Corinthian
helmet, and a suit of Grecian armor, and placing her in a chariot
conduct her round the lake. In what way they formerly decorated the
maidens before the Greeks settled in their neighborhood, I am unable to
say; but I conjecture that they were decked in Egyptian armor, for I am
of opinion that the shield and helmet were brought from Egypt into
Greece.

Above these nomadic tribes, inland, Libya abounds in wild beasts; beyond
the wild-beast tract is a ridge of sand, stretching from the Egyptian
Thebes to the columns of Hercules. At intervals of a ten days' journey
in this ridge, there are pieces of salt in large lumps on hills; and at
the top of each hill, from the midst of the salt, cool, sweet water
gushes up. The first people you come to after a ten days' journey from
Thebes, are the Ammonians, who have a temple resembling that of Theban
Jupiter. For the image of Jupiter at Thebes has the head of a ram. They
have also another kind of spring water which in the morning is tepid,
becomes colder about the time of full forum, and at midday is very cold;
at that time they water their gardens. As the day declines it generally
loses its coldness, till the sun sets, then the water becomes tepid
again, and continuing to increase in heat till midnight, it then boils
and bubbles up; when midnight is passed, it gets cooler until morning.
This fountain is called after the sun. Next to the Ammonians, along the
ridge of sand, at the end of another ten days' journey, there is a hill
of salt, like that of the Ammonians, and water, and men live round it;
the name of this region is Augila; and thither the Nasamonians go to
gather dates. From the Augil, at the end of another ten days' journey,
is another hill of salt and water, and many fruit-bearing palm-trees, as
also in other places; and men inhabit it who are called Garamantes, a
very powerful nation; they lay earth upon the salt, and then sow their
ground. From these to the Lotophagi the shortest route is a journey of
thirty days; amongst them cattle that feed backwards are met with,
having horns that are so bent forward, that they are unable to feed
forwards, because their horns would stick in the ground. They differ
from other kine in no other respect, except that their hide is thicker
and harder. These Garamantes hunt the Ethiopian Troglodytes in
four-horse chariots; these Ethiopian Troglodytes are the swiftest of
foot of all men of whom we have heard any account given. The Troglodytes
feed upon serpents and lizards, and such kinds of reptiles; they speak a
language like no other, but screech like bats.

At the distance of another ten days' journey from the Garamantes is
another hill of salt and water, around which a people live who are
called Atarantes; they are the only race we know of who have not
personal names. For the name Atarantes belongs to them collectively, and
to each one of them no name is given. They curse the sun as he passes
over their heads, and moreover utter against him the foulest invectives,
because he consumes by his scorching heat, the men themselves and their
country. Afterward, at the end of still another ten days' journey, there
is one more hill of salt and water, and men live round it, near a
mountain called Atlas; it is narrow and circular on all sides, and is
said to be so lofty that its top can never be seen; it is never free
from clouds, either in summer or winter. The inhabitants say that it is
the Pillar of Heaven. From this mountain the men derive their
appellation, for they are called Atlantes. They are said neither to eat
the flesh of any animal, nor to see visions. As far, then, as these
Atlantes, I am able to mention the names of the nations that inhabit
this ridge, but not beyond them. This ridge, however, extends as far as
the pillars of Hercules, and even beyond; and there is a mine of salt in
it at intervals of ten days' journey, and men dwelling there. The houses
of them all are built of blocks of salt, for in these parts of Libya no
rain falls; walls being of salt could not of course stand long if rain
did fall. The salt dug out there is white and purple in appearance.
Above this ridge, to the south and interior of Libya, the country is a
desert, without water, without animals, without rain, and without wood;
and there is no kind of moisture in it.

Westward of lake Tritonis, the Libyans are no longer nomads, nor do they
follow the same customs, with respect to their children, as the nomads
are accustomed to do; for the nomadic Libyans, whether all I am unable
to say with certainty, but many of them, when their children are four
years old, burn the veins on the crown of their heads, with uncleaned
sheep's wool; and some of them do so on the veins in the temples; to the
end that humors flowing down from the head may not injure them as long
as they live: and, for this reason, they say they are so very healthy,
for the Libyans are in truth the most healthy of all men with whom we
are acquainted. But I simply repeat what the Libyans themselves say.
From the Libyan women the Greeks derived the attire and gis of
Minerva's statues; for, except that the dress of the Libyan women is
leather, and the fringes that hang from the gis are not serpents, but
made of thongs, they are otherwise equipped in the same way; and,
moreover, the very name proves that the garb of the Palladia comes from
Libya; for the Libyan women throw over their dress, goats' skins without
the hair, fringed and dyed with red. From these goats' skins the Greeks
have borrowed the name of gis. And the howlings in the temples were, I
think, first derived from there; for the Libyan women practise the same
custom, and do it well. The Greeks also learnt from the Libyans to yoke
four horses abreast. All the nomads, except the Nasamonians, inter their
dead in the same manner as the Greeks; these bury them in a sitting
posture, watching when one is about to expire, that they may set him up,
and he may not die supine. Their dwellings are compacted of the asphodel
shrub, interwoven with rushes, and are portable.

To the west of the river Triton, Libyans who are husbandmen next adjoin
the Auses; they are accustomed to live in houses, and are called Maxyes.
They let the hair grow on the right side of the head, and shave the
left; and bedaub the body with vermilion: they say that they are
descended from men who came from Troy. This region, and all the rest of
Libya westward, is much more infested by wild beasts and more thickly
wooded than the country of the nomads; for the eastern country of Libya,
which the nomads inhabit, is low and sandy, as far as the river Triton;
but the country westward of this, which is occupied by agriculturists,
is very mountainous, woody, and abounds with wild beasts. For amongst
them there are enormous serpents, and lions, elephants, bears, asps,
asses with horns, and monsters with dogs' heads and without heads, who
have eyes in their breasts, at least as the Libyans say, together with
wild men and wild women. None of these things are found among the
nomads, but others of the following kind: pygargi, antelopes, buffaloes,
and asses, not such as have horns, but others that never drink; and
oryes, from the horns of which are made the elbows of the Phnician
citherns; in size this beast is equal to an ox; and foxes, hynas,
porcupines, wild rams, dictyes, thoes, panthers, boryes, and land
crocodiles about three cubits long, very much like lizards; ostriches,
and small serpents, each with one horn. These, then, are the wild
animals in that country, besides such as are met with elsewhere, except
the stag and the wild boar; but the stag and the wild boar are never
seen in Libya. They have three sorts of mice there; some called dipodes,
or two-footed; others, zegeries, this name is Libyan, and means the same
as the word signifying hillocks in Greek; and hedgehogs. There are also
weasels produced in the silphium, like those at Tartessus.

The Zaveces adjoin the Maxyan Libyans; their women drive their chariots
in war. The Gyzantes adjoin them; amongst them bees make a great
quantity of honey, and it is said that confectioners make much more. All
these paint themselves with vermilion, and eat monkeys, which abound in
their mountains. Near them, the Carthaginians say, lies an island called
Cyraunis, two hundred stades in length, inconsiderable in breadth, easy
of access from the continent, and abounding in olive trees and vines. In
it is a lake, from the mud of which the girls of the country draw up
gold dust by means of feathers daubed with pitch. Whether this is true I
know not, but I write what is related; it may be so, however, for I have
myself seen pitch drawn up out of a lake and from water in Zacynthus;
and there are several lakes there, the largest of them is seventy feet
every way, and two orgy in depth; into this they let down a pole with a
myrtle branch fastened to the end, and then draw up pitch adhering to
the myrtle; it has the smell of asphalt, but is in other respects better
than the pitch of Pieria. They pour it into a cistern dug near the lake,
and when they have collected a sufficient quantity, draw it off from the
cistern into jars. All that falls into the lake passes under ground, and
appears again upon the surface of the sea, which is about four stades
distant from the lake. This account given of the island may probably be
true. The Carthaginians further say, that beyond the pillars of Hercules
there is an inhabited region of Libya; when they arrive among these
people and have unloaded their merchandise, they set it in order on the
shore, go on board their ships, and make a great smoke; the inhabitants,
seeing the smoke, come down to the sea, deposit gold in exchange for the
merchandise, and withdraw to some distance from the merchandise; the
Carthaginians then, going ashore, examine the gold, and if the quantity
seems sufficient for the merchandise they take it up and sail away; but
if it is not sufficient, they go on board their ships again and wait;
the natives then approach and deposit more gold, until they have
satisfied them; neither party ever wrongs the other; for they do not
touch the gold before it is made adequate to the value of the
merchandise, nor do the natives touch the merchandise before the other
party has taken the gold.

No part of Libya appears to me so good in fertility as to be compared
with Asia or Europe, except only the district of Cinyps; for the land
bears the same name as the river, and is equal to the best land for the
production of corn; nor is it at all like the rest of Libya; for the
soil is black, and well watered with springs, and it is neither affected
at all by drought, nor is it injured by imbibing too much rain, which
falls in this part of Libya. The proportion of the produce of this land
equals that of Babylon. The land also which the Euesperides occupy is
good; for when it yields its best, it produces a hundred-fold; but that
in Cinyps three hundred-fold. The district of Cyrene, which is the
highest of that part of Libya which the nomads occupy, has three
seasons, a circumstance worthy of admiration; for the first fruits near
the sea swell so as to be ready for the harvest and vintage; when these
are gathered in, the fruits of the middle region, away from the sea,
swell so as to be gathered in, these they call uplands; and just as this
middle harvest has been gathered in, that in the highest part becomes
ripe and swells. So that when the first crop has been drunk and eaten,
the last comes in. Thus harvest occupies the Cyrenans during eight
months. This maybe sufficient to say concerning these things.

[Illustration: OLIVE TREES.]

The Persians once upon a time, sent against the city of Barce, laid
siege to it for nine months, digging passages under ground that reached
to the walls, and making vigorous assaults. Now these excavations were
discovered by a worker of bronze, carrying a bronze shield round within
the wall, and applying it to the ground within the city: in other places
to which he applied it, it made no noise, but at the parts that were
excavated, the metal of the shield sounded. The Barcans, therefore,
countermining them in that part, slew the Persians who were employed in
the excavation. When much time had been spent, and many had fallen on
both sides, and not the fewest on the side of the Persians, Amasis,
general of the land forces, had recourse to the following stratagem:
Finding that the Barcans could not be taken by force, but might be by
artifice, he dug a wide pit by night, laid weak planks of wood over it,
and on the surface over the planks he spread a heap of earth, making it
level with the rest of the ground. At daybreak he invited the Barcans
to a conference; they gladly assented, thinking that at last they were
pleased to come to terms: and they made an agreement of the following
nature, concluding the treaty over the concealed pit: "That as long as
this earth shall remain as it is, the treaty should continue in force;
and that the Barcans should pay a reasonable tribute to the king, and
that the Persians should form no new designs against the Barcans."
After the treaty the Barcans, confiding in the Persians, went freely
out of the city, and allowed any one of the Persians who chose to pass
within the wall, throwing open all the gates. But the Persians, having
broken down the concealed bridge, rushed within the wall: having not
fully kept their oath. The Persians reduced the Barcans to slavery and
took their departure. But king Darius gave them a village in the
district of Bactria, to dwell in, and the name of Barce was given to
this village, which was still inhabited in my time, in the Bactrian
territory.

[20] Herodotus means that south of the equator the sun was in the north.




_BOOK V. TERPSICHORE._




CHAPTER I.

CONQUESTS OF THE GENERALS OF DARIUS.


The Persians, left in Europe by Darius under the command of Megabazus,
subdued the Perinthians first of the Hellespontines, who were unwilling
to submit to Darius, and had been before roughly handled by the
Ponians. For an oracle had admonished the Ponians to invade the
Perinthians, and if the Perinthians, when encamped against them, should
challenge them, shouting to them by name, then to attack, but if they
should not shout out to them, not to attack. A threefold single combat
took place between them according to a challenge; for they matched a man
with a man, a horse with a horse, and a dog with a dog. The Perinthians,
victorious in two of these combats, through excess of joy sang the Pon,
whereupon the Ponians conjectured that this was the meaning of the
oracle, and said among themselves: "Now surely the oracle must be
accomplished; now it is our part to act." The Ponians attacked the
Perinthians as they were singing the Pon, gained a complete victory,
and left but few of them alive.

The nation of the Thracians is the greatest of all among men, except the
Indians; and if they were governed by one man, or acted in concert, they
would, in my opinion, be invincible, and by far the most powerful of all
nations. But as this is impracticable, and it is impossible that they
should ever be united, they are weak.

Beyond the Ister appears to be an interminable desert, and the only men
that I am able to hear of as dwelling there are those called Sigynn,
who wear the Medic dress; their horses are shaggy all over the body, to
five fingers in depth of hair; they are small, flat-nosed, and unable to
carry men; but when yoked to chariots are very fleet. They say that
these people are a colony of Medes. How they can have been a colony of
Medes I cannot comprehend; but any thing may happen in the course of
time.

There is a curious people who inhabit Lake Prasias itself, who were not
at all subdued by Megabazus;they live upon the lake in dwellings
erected upon planks fitted on lofty piles, which are driven in the
middle of the lake, with a narrow entrance from the main land by a
single bridge. These piles that support the planks all the citizens
anciently placed there at the common charge; but afterward they
established a law to the following effect: Whenever a man marries, for
each wife he sinks three piles, bringing wood from a mountain called
Orbelus: but every man has several wives. Each one has a hut on the
planks, in which he dwells, with a trap-door closely fitted in the
planks, and leading down to the lake. They tie the young children with a
cord around the foot, for fear they should fall into the lake beneath.
To their horses and beasts of burden they give fish for fodder; of which
there is such an abundance, that you have simply to open your trap-door,
let down an empty basket by a cord into the lake, when, after waiting a
short time, you draw it up full of fish.

[Illustration: HEAD-DRESS OF A RIDING HORSE.]

Megabazus, after conquering the Ponians, arrived at the Hellespont,
crossed over, and came to Sardis. In the meantime, Histius the Milesian
was building a wall around the place, which, at his own request, he had
received from Darius as a reward for his services in preserving the
bridge: this place was near the river Strymon, and its name Myrcinus.
Megabazus, upon learning what was being done by Histius, as soon as he
reached Sardis said to Darius: "O king, what have you done, in allowing
a crafty and subtle Greek to possess a city in Thrace, where there is an
abundance of timber fit for building ships and plenty of wood for oars,
and silver mines? A great multitude of Greeks and barbarians dwell
around, who, when they have obtained him as a leader, will do whatever
he may command, both by day and by night. Put a stop therefore to the
proceedings of this man, that you may not be harassed by a domestic war;
send for him in a gentle manner, and stop him: and when you have him in
your power, take care that he never returns to the Greeks." Megabazus
easily persuaded Darius, since he wisely foresaw what was to happen. So
Darius sent a messenger to Myrcinus, who spoke as follows: "Histius,
King Darius says thus: I find on consideration that there is no man
better affected to me and my affairs than thyself; and this I have
learnt, not by words, but actions; now, since I have great designs to
put in execution, come to me by all means, that I may communicate them
to thee." Histius, giving credit to these words, and at the time
considering it a great honor to become a counsellor of the king, went to
Sardis: when he arrived, Darius said, "Histius, I have sent for you on
this occasion. As soon as I returned from Scythia, and you were out of
my sight, I have wished for nothing so much as to see you and converse
with you again; being persuaded that a friend who is both intelligent
and well affected, is the most valuable of all possessions; both of
which I am able to testify from my own knowledge concur in you, as
regards my affairs. You have done well in coming, and I make you this
offer: Think no more of Miletus, nor of the new-founded city in Thrace;
but follow me to Susa, have the same that I have, and be the partner of
my table and counsels." And Darius appointed Artaphernes, his brother by
the same father, to be governor of Sardis, and departed for Susa, taking
Histius with him. He first nominated Otanes to be general of the forces
on the coast, whose father, Sisamnes, one of the royal judges, King
Cambyses had put to death and flayed, because he had given an unjust
judgment for a sum of money. He had his skin torn off, and cut into
thongs, and extended it on the bench on which he used to sit, when he
pronounced judgment; then Cambyses appointed as judge in the room of
Sisamnes, whom he had slain and flayed, the son of Sisamnes, admonishing
him to remember on what seat he sat to administer justice. This very
Otanes, then, being now appointed successor to Megabazus in the command
of the army, subdued the Byzantians and Chalcedonians, and took
Antandros, which belongs to the territory of Troas, and Lamponium; and
obtaining ships from the Lesbians, he took Lemnos and Imbrus, both of
which were then inhabited by Pelasgians. The Lemnians fought valiantly,
and defended themselves for some time, but were at length overcome; and
over those who survived, the Persians set up Lycaretus as governor, the
brother of Mandrius, who had reigned in Samos. Otanes enslaved and
subdued them all for various alleged reasons: some he charged with
desertion to the Scythians; others he accused of having harassed Darius'
army in their return home from the Scythians.

Afterward, for the intermission from misfortune was not of long
duration, evils arose a second time to the Ionians from Naxos and
Miletus. For, on the one hand, Naxos surpassed all the islands in
opulence; and on the other, Miletus, at the same time, had attained the
summit of its prosperity, and was accounted the ornament of Ionia. Some
of the opulent men, exiled from Naxos by the people, went to Miletus:
the governor of Miletus happened to be Aristagoras, son of Molpagoras,
son-in-law and cousin of Histius, whom Darius detained at Susa. These
Naxians arrived at Miletus, entreated Aristagoras, if he could, by any
means, to give them some assistance so that they might return to their
own country. He, perceiving that if by his means they should return to
their city, he might get the dominion of Naxos, used the friendship of
Histius as a pretence, and addressed the following discourse to them:
"I am not able of myself to furnish you with a force sufficient to
reinstate you against the wishes of the Naxians, who are in possession
of the city, for I hear that the Naxians have eight thousand heavy-armed
men, and a considerable number of ships of war. Yet I will contrive some
way, and use my best endeavors; my scheme is this: Artaphernes happens
to be my friend; he is son of Hystaspes and brother of king Darius, and
commands all the maritime parts of Asia, and has a large army and navy.
This man, I am persuaded, will do whatever we desire." The Naxians urged
Aristagoras to go about it in the best way he could, and bade him
promise presents, and their expenses to the army, for they would repay
it; having great expectation that when they should appear at Naxos the
Naxians would do whatever they should order, as also would the other
islanders; for of these Cyclades islands not one was as yet subject to
Darius.

Accordingly Aristagoras journeyed to Sardis, and told Artaphernes, that
Naxos was an island of no great extent, to be sure, but beautiful and
fertile, and near Ionia, and in it was much wealth and many slaves. "Do
send an army against this country, to reinstate those who have been
banished; and if you do this, I have, in the first place, a large sum of
money ready, in addition to the expenses of the expedition, for it is
just that we who lead you on should supply that; and in the next, you
will acquire for the king Naxos itself, and the islands dependent upon
it, Paros, Andros, and the rest that are called Cyclades. Setting out
from there you will easily attack Euba, a large and wealthy island, not
less than Cyprus, and very easy to be taken. A hundred ships are
sufficient to subdue them all." The reply was quickly given: "You
propose things advantageous to the king's house, and advise every thing
well, except the number of ships; instead of one hundred, two hundred
shall be ready at the commencement of the spring. But it is necessary
that the king himself should approve of the design." Aristagoras, wild
with delight, went back to Miletus. And Artaphernes, finding that Darius
himself approved of the plan, made ready two hundred triremes, and a
very numerous body of Persians and other allies: and he appointed
Megabates general, a Persian of the family of the Archimenid, his own
and Darius' nephew, whose daughter, if the report be true, was afterward
betrothed to Pausanias, son of Cleombrotus the Lacedmonian, who aspired
to become tyrant of Greece. Artaphernes, having appointed Megabates
general, sent forward the army to Aristagoras.

Megabates, with Aristagoras, the Ionian forces, and the Naxians, sailed
professedly for the Hellespont; but when he arrived at Chios, anchored
at Caucasa, that he might cross over from there to Naxos by a north
wind. However, it was fated that the Naxians were not to perish by this
armament, as the following event occurred: As Megabates was going round
the watches on board the ships, he found no one on guard on board a
Myndian ship; indignant at this, he ordered his body-guards to find the
captain of this ship, whose name was Scylax, and to bind him with his
body half-way through the lower row-lock of the vessel, so that his head
should be on the outside of the vessel, and his legs within. Some one
told Aristagoras that Megabates had bound and disgraced his Myndian
friend. He went therefore and interceded for him with the Persian, but,
when he found he could obtain nothing, went himself and released him.
Megabates, hearing of this, was very indignant, and enraged at
Aristagoras, and told him so; "but," said Aristagoras, "what have you to
do with these matters? Did not Artaphernes send you to obey me, and to
sail wheresoever I should command?" Megabates, still more exasperated at
this, as soon as night arrived, dispatched men in a ship to Naxos, to
inform the Naxians of the impending danger. The Naxians, who had not a
suspicion that this armament was coming against them, immediately
carried every thing from the fields into the town, and, with plenty of
food and drink, prepared to undergo a siege, so the Persians had to
attack men well fortified, and after besieging them four months,
consumed all the supplies they had brought with them, together with
large sums furnished by Aristagoras, and wanting still more to carry on
the siege, they were forced to build a fortress for the Naxian exiles,
and retire to the continent unsuccessful.

Aristagoras was thus unable to fulfil his promise to Artaphernes; while
at the same time the expenses of the expedition pressed heavily on him
on account of the ill success of the army; and having incurred the ill
will of Megabates to such an extent that he feared that he should be
deprived of the government of Miletus, he meditated a revolt. It
happened at the same time that a messenger with his head tattooed came
from Susa from Histius, urging Aristagoras to revolt from the king. For
Histius, being desirous to communicate to Aristagoras his wish for him
to revolt, had no other means of signifying it with safety, because the
roads were guarded; therefore, having shaved the head of the most
trustworthy of his slaves, he marked it with a sharp iron, and waited
till the hair had grown again, then sent him to Miletus without other
instructions except that when he arrived at Miletus he should desire
Aristagoras to shave off his hair and look upon his head: the punctures,
as I have said before, signified a wish for him to revolt. Histius did
this because he looked upon his detention at Susa as a great misfortune;
while if a revolt should take place he had great hopes that he should be
sent down to the coast; but if Miletus made no new attempt, he thought
that he should never go there again. It was resolved to revolt, and
messengers were sent to the force that had returned from Naxos, and
which was at Myus, to seize the captains on board the ships. Aristagoras
thus openly revolted, devising every thing he could against Darius. And
first, in pretence, having laid aside the sovereignty, he established an
equality in Miletus, in order that the Milesians might more readily join
with him in the revolt. Afterward he effected the same throughout the
rest of Ionia, expelling some of the tyrants; and he delivered up those
whom he had taken from on board the ships that had sailed with him
against Naxos, to the cities, in order to gratify the people, giving
them up to the respective cities, from whence each came. The
Mityleneans, as soon as they received Coes, led him out, and stoned him
to death; but the Cymeans let their tyrant go; and in like manner most
of the others let theirs go. Accordingly there was a suppression of
tyrants throughout the cities. But Aristagoras enjoined them all to
appoint magistrates in each of the cities, and went himself in a trireme
as ambassador to Sparta, for it was necessary for him to procure some
powerful alliance.

Aristagoras arrived at Sparta, when Cleomenes held the government; and
he went to confer with him, as the Lacedmonians say, carrying a bronze
tablet, on which was engraved the circumference of the whole earth, the
whole sea, and all rivers. "Wonder not, Cleomenes," said Aristagoras,
"at my eagerness in coming here, for it is a great sorrow to us that the
children of Ionians should be slaves instead of free, and above all
others it is a disgrace to you, inasmuch as you are at the head of
Greece. I adjure you by the Grecian gods, rescue the Ionians, who are of
your own blood, from servitude. It is easy for you to effect this, for
the barbarians are not valiant; whereas you, in matters relating to war,
have attained to the utmost height of glory; their mode of fighting is,
with bows and short spears, and they engage in battle wearing loose
trousers, and turbans on their heads, so that they are easy to be
overcome. Besides, there are treasures belonging to those who inhabit
that continent, such as are not possessed by all other nations together;
gold, silver, bronze, variegated garments, beasts of burden, and slaves;
all these you may have if you will. They live adjoining one another as I
will show you. Next to these Ionians are the Lydians, who inhabit a
fertile country, and abound in silver." As he said this he showed the
map of the earth, which he had brought with him, engraved on a tablet.
"Next to the Lydians," proceeded Aristagoras, "are these Phrygians to
the eastward, who are the richest in cattle and in corn of all with whom
I am acquainted. Next to the Phrygians are the Cappadocians, whom we
call Syrians; and bordering on them, the Cilicians, extending to this
sea in which the island of Cyprus is situated; they pay an annual
tribute of five hundred talents to the king. Next to the Cilicians are
these Armenians, who also abound in cattle; and next to the Armenians
are the Metienians, who occupy this country; and next them this
territory of Cissia, in which Susa is situated, on this river Choaspes,
and here the great king resides, and here are his treasures of wealth.
If you take this city, you may boldly contend with Jupiter in wealth. As
it is, you carry on war for a country of small extent, and not very
fertile, and of narrow limits, with the Messenians, who are your equals
in valor, and with the Arcadians and Argives, who have nothing akin to
gold or silver, the desire of which induces men to hazard their lives in
battle. But when an opportunity is offered to conquer all Asia with
ease, will you prefer any thing else?" "Milesian friend," said
Cleomenes, "I defer to give you an answer until the third day." They met
at the appointed time and place, and Cleomenes asked Aristagoras, how
many days' journey it was from the sea of the Ionians to the king.
Aristagoras, though he was cunning in other things, and had deceived him
with much address, made a slip in this; for he should not have told the
real fact, if he wished to draw the Spartans into Asia; whereas he told
him frankly that it was a three months' journey up there. Cutting short
the rest of the description which Aristagoras was proceeding to give of
the journey, Cleomenes said: "My friend, from Miletus, depart from
Sparta before sunset; for you speak no agreeable language to the
Lacedmonians, in wishing to lead them a three months' journey from the
sea;" and Cleomenes went home. Aristagoras, nothing daunted, taking an
olive-branch in his hand, went to the house of Cleomenes, entered in, as
a suppliant, and besought Cleomenes to listen to him. The latter's
little child, a daughter, whose name was Gorgo, stood by him; she
happened to be his only child, and was about eight or nine years of age.
Cleomenes bade him say what he wished, and not mind the presence of the
little girl. Thereupon Aristagoras promised him ten talents, if he would
do as he desired; and as Cleomenes refused, Aristagoras went on
increasing his offers, until he promised fifty talents, when little
Gorgo cried out, "Papa, this stranger will corrupt you, if you don't
quickly depart." Cleomenes, pleased with the advice of the child,
retired to another apartment; and Aristagoras was forced to leave Sparta
altogether, without ever getting another opportunity to give further
particulars of the route to the city of the great king.

With respect to this road, the case is as follows: There are royal
stations all along, and excellent inns, and the whole road is through an
inhabited and safe country. There are twenty stations extending through
Lydia and Phrygia, and the distance is ninety-four parasangs and a half.
After Phrygia, the river Halys is met with, at which there are gates,
which it is absolutely necessary to pass through, and thus to cross the
river; there is also a considerable fort on it. When you cross over into
Cappadocia, and traverse that country to the borders of Cilicia, there
are eight and twenty stations, and one hundred and four parasangs; and
on the borders of these people, you go through two gates, and pass by
two forts. When you have gone through these and made the journey through
Cilicia, there are three stations, and fifteen parasangs and a half. The
boundary of Cilicia and Armenia is a river that is crossed in boats,
called the Euphrates. In Armenia there are fifteen stations for
resting-places, and fifty-six parasangs and a half; there is also a fort
at the stations. Four rivers that are crossed in boats flow through this
country, which it is absolutely necessary to ferry over. First, the
Tigris; then the second and third have the same name, though they are
not the same river, nor flow from the same source. For the first
mentioned of these flows from the Armenians, and the latter from the
Matienians. The fourth river is called the Gyndes, which Cyrus once
distributed into three hundred and sixty channels. As you enter from
Armenia into the country of Matiene, there are four stations; and from
thence as you proceed to the Cissian territory there are eleven
stations, and forty-two parasangs and a half, to the river Choaspes,
which also must be crossed in boats; on this Susa is built. All these
stations amount to one hundred and eleven,[21] as you go up from Sardis
to Susa. Now if the royal road has been correctly measured in parasangs,
and if the parasang is equal to thirty stades, as indeed it is, from
Sardis to the royal palace, called Memnonia, is a distance of thirteen
thousand five hundred stades, the parasangs being four hundred and
fifty; and by those who travel one hundred and fifty stades every day,
just ninety days are spent on the journey. So Aristagoras spoke
correctly when he stated the distance to Susa.




CHAPTER II.

THE IONIAN REVOLT.


Aristagoras the Milesian, having been expelled from Sparta by Cleomenes
the Lacedmonian, repaired to Athens; for this city was much more
powerful than the rest. Presenting himself before the people, he said
the same that he had done at Sparta, respecting the wealth of Asia and
the Persian mode of warfare, how they used neither shield nor spear, and
could be easily conquered. He said also that the Milesians were a colony
of the Athenians, and it was but reasonable that they, having such great
power, should rescue them. And as there was nothing he did not promise,
being very much in earnest, at length he persuaded them. It appears to
be more easy to impose upon a multitude than one man; this schemer, you
see, was not able to impose upon Cleomenes the Lacedmonian singly, but
did upon thirty thousand Athenians. Twenty ships were sent to succor the
Ionians, and Melanthius commander over them, a citizen who was
universally esteemed. These ships proved the source of calamities both
to Greeks and barbarians. Aristagoras sailed first, arrived at Miletus,
and had recourse to a project from which no advantage could result to
the Ionians; nor did he employ it for that purpose, but that he might
vex king Darius. He sent a man into Phrygia, to the Ponians, who had
been carried away captive by Megabazus, from the river Strymon, and
occupied a tract in Phrygia, and a village by themselves. Arrived among
the Ponians, the messenger spoke as follows: "Men of Ponia,
Aristagoras, tyrant of Miletus, has sent me to suggest to you a mode of
deliverance, if you will take his advice. For all Ionia has revolted
from the king, and offers you an opportunity of returning safe to your
own country; as far as to the coast take care of yourselves, and we will
provide for the rest." When the Ponians heard these words, they
considered it a very joyful event, and taking with them their children
and wives, fled to the coast; though some of them, through fear,
remained where they were. When the Ponians reached the coast, they
crossed over to Chios, when a large body of Persian cavalry came on
their heels, and sent orders to Chios to the Ponians, commanding them
to return. The Ponians did not listen to the proposal; but the Chians
conveyed them to Lesbos, and the Lesbians forwarded them to Doriscus;
thence proceeding on foot they reached Ponia.

The Athenians arrived with twenty ships, bringing with them five
triremes of the Eretrians, who engaged in this expedition out of
good-will to the Milesians, in order to repay a former obligation; for
the Milesians had formerly joined the Eretrians in the war against the
Chalcidians. When these had arrived, and the rest of the allies had come
up, Aristagoras resolved to make an expedition to Sardis. He himself did
not march with the army, but remained at Miletus, and appointed as
generals of the Milesians, his own brother Charopinus, and of the other
citizens Hermophantus. The Ionians arrived at Ephesus with this force,
left their ships at Coressus, in the Ephesian territory, and advanced
with a numerous army, taking Ephesians for their guides; and marching by
the side of the river Cayster, they crossed Mount Tmolus, and reached
and took Sardis without opposition; all except the citadel, for
Artaphernes with a strong garrison defended the citadel. The following
accident prevented them, after they had taken the city, from plundering
it. Most of the houses in Sardis were built with reeds; and such of them
as were built with brick, had roof of reeds. A soldier happened to set
fire to one of these, and immediately the flame spread from house to
house, and consumed the whole city. While the city was burning, the
Lydians, and as many of the Persians as were in the city, being enclosed
on every side, and having no means of escaping from the city, rushed
together to the market-place, and to the river Pactolus, which, bringing
down grains of gold from Mount Tmolus, flows through the middle of the
market-place, and then discharges itself into the river Hermus, and that
into the sea. The Lydians and Persians, being assembled on this Pactolus
and at the market-place, were constrained to defend themselves: and the
Ionians, seeing some of the enemy standing on their defence, and others
coming up in great numbers, retired through fear to the mountain called
Tmolus, and thence under favor of the night retreated to their ships.
Thus Sardis was burnt, and in it the temple of the native goddess
Cybebe; the Persians, making a pretext of this, afterwards burnt in
retaliation the temples of Greece. As soon as the Persians who had
settlements on this side the river Halys were informed of these things,
they drew together and marched to assist the Lydians; the Ionians were
no longer at Sardis; but following on their track they overtook them at
Ephesus, where the Ionians drew out in battle-array against them, and
coming to an engagement, were sorely beaten; and the Persians slew many
of them, among other persons of distinction, Eualcis, general of the
Eretrians, who had gained the prize in the contests for the crown, and
had been much celebrated by Simonides the Cean. Those who escaped from
the battle were dispersed throughout the cities.

Such was the result of the encounter. Afterward, the Athenians, totally
abandoning the Ionians, though Aristagoras urgently solicited them by
ambassadors, refused to send them any assistance. The Ionians, deprived
of the alliance of the Athenians, (for they had conducted themselves in
such a manner toward Darius from the first,) nevertheless prepared for
war with the king. And sailing to the Hellespont, they reduced Byzantium
and all the other cities in that quarter to their obedience. They then
sailed out of the Hellespont, and gained over to their alliance the
greater part of Caria; for the city of Caunus, which before would not
join their alliance, when they had burnt Sardis, came over to their side.

When it was told king Darius, that Sardis had been taken and burnt by
the Athenians and Ionians, and that Aristagoras the Milesian was the
chief of the confederacy and the contriver of that enterprise, it is
related that he took no account of the Ionians, well knowing that they
would not escape unpunished for their rebellion, but inquired where the
Athenians were; then having been informed, he called for a bow, put an
arrow into it, let it fly toward heaven, and as he shot it into the air,
exclaimed: "O Jupiter, grant that I may revenge myself on the
Athenians!" Then he commanded one of his attendants, every time dinner
was set before him, to say thrice: "Sire, remember the Athenians."
Summoning to his presence Histius the Milesian, whom he had already
detained a long time, Darius said: "I am informed, Histius, that your
lieutenant, to whom you intrusted Miletus, has attempted innovations
against me; for he has brought men from the other continent, and with
them Ionians, who shall give me satisfaction for what they have done;
and has deprived me of Sardis. Now, can it appear to you that this is
right? Could such a thing have been done without your advice? Beware
lest hereafter you expose yourself to blame." To this Histius answered:
"O king, what have you said? That I should advise a thing from which any
grief, great or little, should ensue to you! With what object should I
do so? What am I in want of? I, who have all things the same as you, and
am deemed worthy to share all your counsels? But if my lieutenant has
done any such thing as you mention, be assured he has done it of his own
contrivance. But I do not believe the account, that the Milesians and my
lieutenant have attempted any innovations against your authority. Yet if
you have heard the truth, consider, O king, what mischief you have done
in withdrawing me from the coast. For the Ionians seem, when I was out
of their sight, to have done what they long ago desired to do; and had I
been in Ionia not one city would have stirred. Suffer me therefore to go
with all speed to Ionia, that I may restore all things there to their
former condition, and deliver into your hands this lieutenant of
Miletus, who has plotted the whole. When I have done this according to
your mind, I swear by the royal gods, not to put off the garments which
I shall wear when I go down to Ionia, before I have made the great
island Sardinia tributary to you." His speaking thus deceived the king;
Darius was persuaded, and let him go, charging him to return to Susa, as
soon as he should have accomplished what he had promised.

While the news concerning Sardis was going up to the king, tidings were
brought to Onesilus the Salaminian, as he was besieging the Amathusians,
that Artybius, a Persian, leading a large Persian force on shipboard,
was to be expected in Cyprus. Onesilus accordingly sent heralds to the
different parts of Ionia, inviting them to assist him; and the Ionians,
without any protracted deliberation, arrived at Cyprus with a large
armament. The Persians crossed over in ships from Cilicia, and marched
by land against Salamis.

Then the kings of the Cyprians drew up their forces in line, and
stationed the best of the Salaminians and Solians against the Persians.
Onesilus voluntarily took up his position directly against Artybius, the
general of the Persians. Artybius used to ride on a horse, that had been
taught to rear up against an armed enemy. Onesilus had a shield-bearer,
a Carian, well skilled in matters of war, and otherwise full of courage,
to whom he said: "I am informed that the horse of Artybius rears up, and
with his feet and mouth attacks whomsoever he is made to engage with;
tell me which you will watch and strike, whether the horse or Artybius
himself." His attendant answered: "I am ready to do both, or either of
them, but a king and a general ought, I think, to engage with a king and
a general. If you vanquish one who is a general, your glory is great;
while if he should vanquish you, which may the gods avert, to fall by a
noble hand is but half the calamity. We servants should engage with
other servants, and also against a horse, whose tricks you need not fear
at all; for I promise you he shall never again rear up against any man."
Forthwith the forces joined battle by land and sea. Now, the Ionians
fought valiantly on that day, when the armies met in close combat; and
when Artybius, seated on his horse, bore down upon Onesilus. Onesilus,
as he had concerted with his shield-bearer, struck Artybius himself; and
as the horse was throwing his feet against the shield of Onesilus, the
Carian with a scythe cut off the horse's feet. So that Artybius, the
general of the Persians, fell together with his horse on the spot. While
the rest were fighting, Stesenor, of Curium, deserted with no
inconsiderable body of men, and the chariots of war belonging to the
Salaminians did the same as the Curians. Consequently the Persians
became superior to the Cyprians. The army was put to flight, many fell,
and amongst them Onesilus, and the king of the Solians, Aristocyprus,
son of the Philocyprus whom Solon the Athenian, when he visited Cyprus,
celebrated in his verses above all tyrants. The Amathusians cut off the
head of Onesilus, because he had besieged them, took it to Amathus, and
suspended it over the gates; and when the head had become hollow, a
swarm of bees entered it, and filled it with honey-comb. An answer was
given to the Amathusians, who consulted the oracle respecting it, "that
they should take down the head and bury it, and sacrifice annually to
Onesilus, as to a hero, and that it would turn out better for them."

Afterward, the Persians crossed the Mander and engaged the Carians on
the banks of the river Marsyas. They fought an obstinate battle, and at
last overpowered them. Of the Persians there fell about two thousand,
and of the Carians ten thousand. The Carians, however, afterward
recovered from this wound, and renewed the contest. For hearing that the
Persians designed to invade their cities, they placed an ambuscade on
the way to Pedasus, into which the Persians, falling by night, were cut
in pieces, with their generals Daurises, Amorges, and Sisamaces.

Hymees, who was one of those who pursued the Ionians that had attacked
Sardis, bending his march toward the Propontis, took Cius of Mysia. When
he heard that Daurises had quitted the Hellespont, and was marching
against Caria, he abandoned the Propontis, and led his army on the
Hellespont. He subdued all the olians who inhabited the territory of
Ilium, and subdued the Gergith, the remaining descendants of the
ancient Teucrians. Just then, however, he died of disease in the Troad.
But Artaphernes, governor of Sardis, and Otanes, who were appointed to
invade Ionia and the neighboring territory of olia, took Clazomen and
Cyme.

Aristagoras the Milesian, for he was not, as it proved, a man of strong
courage, after he had thus thrown Ionia into confusion, and raised great
disturbances, thought of flight, when he saw these results. Besides, it
appeared to him impossible to overcome King Darius; so calling his
partisans together, he suggested "that it would be better for them to
have some sure place of refuge, in case they should be expelled from
Miletus." He asked, therefore, whether he should lead them to Sardinia,
to found a colony, or to Myrcinus of the Edonians, which Histius had
begun to fortify, having received it as a gift from Darius. However, the
opinion of Hecatus the historian, son of Hegesander, was, that they
should set out for neither of these places, but should build a fortress
in the island of Leros, and remain quiet, if they were compelled to quit
Miletus. But Aristagoras himself was decidedly in favor of proceeding to
Myrcinus; he therefore intrusted Miletus to Pythagoras, a citizen of
distinction, and, taking with him all who were willing, sailed to
Thrace, and took possession of the region to which he was bound. But
both Aristagoras himself and all his army perished while he was laying
siege to a city in Thrace.

[21] The detail of stations above-mentioned gives only eighty-one
instead of one hundred and eleven. The discrepancy can only be accounted
for by a supposed defect in the manuscripts.




_BOOK VI. ERATO._




CHAPTER I.

THE SUPPRESSION OF THE IONIAN REVOLT.


Aristagoras thus induced the Ionians to revolt, and died; and Histius,
tyrant of Miletus, repaired to Sardis. When he arrived from Susa,
Artaphernes, Governor of Sardis, asked him for what reason he supposed
the Ionians had revolted. Histius said he did not know, and seemed
surprised at what had happened, as if he knew nothing of the present
state of affairs. But Artaphernes saw that he was dissembling, and being
aware of the exact truth as to the revolt, said: "Histius, the state of
the case is this: you made the shoe and Aristagoras has put it on."
Histius in alarm fled to the coast as soon as night came on, and
although he had promised to reduce the great island of Sardinia for
Darius, he insinuated himself into the command of the Ionians in the war
against him. At Chios he was taken and put in chains, being suspected by
the Chians of planning some new design against them in favor of Darius.
However, the Chians, being assured that he was an enemy to the king,
released him, and conveyed him to Miletus, at his own request; but the
Milesians, delighted at being rid of Aristagoras, were by no means
desirous to receive another tyrant into their country, as they had
tasted of freedom. Thereupon Histius, going down to Miletus by night,
endeavored to enter it by force, but was wounded in the thigh by one of
the Milesians. When he was repulsed from his own country, he went back
to Chios, and from there, since he could not persuade the Chians to help
him, he crossed over to Mitylene, and prevailed with the Lesbians to
furnish him with ships; they manned eight triremes, and sailed with
Histius to Byzantium. There taking up their station, they took all the
ships that sailed out of the Pontus, except such of them as said they
were ready to submit to Histius.

But a large naval and land-force was expected against Miletus itself.
For the Persian generals had united their forces and formed one camp to
march to Miletus, deeming the other cities of less consequence. The
Ionians, hearing of this, sent their respective deputies to the
Panionium, and determined not to assemble any land-forces to oppose the
Persians; but bade the Milesians themselves defend their walls, while
they should man their navy, without leaving a single ship behind, and
assemble as soon as possible at Lade, to fight in defence of Miletus.
Lade is a small island lying off the city of the Milesians. Soon the
Ionians came up with their ships manned, and formed their line, a fleet
three hundred and fifty-three triremes strong. On the side of the
barbarians the number of ships amounted to six hundred, and when they
arrived on the Milesian coast, and all their land-forces had come up,
the Persian generals began to fear they should not be strong enough to
overcome them, and so should be also unable to take Miletus, since they
were not masters at sea, and then might be in danger of receiving
punishment at the hands of Darius. Taking these things into
consideration, they summoned the tyrants of the Ionians, who had been
deprived of their governments by Aristagoras, and had fled to the Medes,
and who happened at that time to be serving in the army against Miletus.
"Men of Ionia," they said, "let each of you now show his zeal for the
king's house. For let each of you endeavor to detach his own countrymen
from the rest of the confederacy, and proclaim this, that they shall
suffer no hurt on account of their rebellion, nor shall their buildings,
whether sacred or profane, be burnt, nor shall they be treated with more
severity than they were before. But if they do not do this, and will at
all events come to the hazard of a battle, threaten that, when conquered
in battle, they shall all be enslaved." And the tyrants of the Ionians
sent each by night to his own countrymen, to make known the warning. But
the Ionians to whom these messages came, continued firm to their purpose
and would not listen to treachery; for each thought that the Persians
had sent this message.

When the Ionians had assembled at Lade, a council was held, and the
Phocan general Dionysius spoke as follows: "Our affairs are in a
critical[22] state, O Ionians; we are to be freemen or slaves, and that
too run-away slaves. But if you are willing to undergo hardships, for
the present you will have to toil, but will be enabled, by overcoming
your enemies, to be free; on the other hand, if you abandon yourselves
to ease and disorder, I have no hope that you will escape punishment at
the hands of the king for your revolt. But be persuaded by me, and
entrust yourselves to my guidance, and I promise you, that if the gods
are impartial, either our enemies will not fight us at all, or if they
do fight with us, they will be completely beaten." The Ionians intrusted
themselves to the guidance of Dionysius without hesitation who daily led
out the ships into a line, exercised the rowers, by practising the
manuvre of cutting through one another's line, put the marines under
arms, and kept the ships at anchor for the rest of the day. For seven
days they continued to obey, but on the eighth the Ionians, unaccustomed
to such toil, and worn down by hardships and the heat of the sun,
grumbled to each other in such terms as these: "What deity have we
offended to fill up this measure of affliction? we who were so beside
ourselves, as to have intrusted ourselves to the guidance of a
presumptuous Phocan, who, all told, contributed only three ships, but
having got us under his control, afflicts us with intolerable hardships.
Many of us have already fallen into distempers, and many more must
expect to meet with the same fate. Instead of these evils, it would be
better for us to suffer anything else, and to endure the impending
servitude, be it what it may, than be oppressed by the present, Come,
let us no longer obey him." And from that moment no one would obey; but,
pitching their tents on the island, they continued under the shade, and
would not go on board the ships, or perform their exercise. When the
generals of the Samians observed what was passing among the Ionians, and
saw great disorder among them, they accepted the proposal of aces, son
of Syloson, which he had before sent them at the desire of the Persians,
exhorting them to abandon the confederacy of the Ionians. Besides, it
was clearly impossible for them to overcome the power of the king,
because they were convinced, that if they should overcome Darius with
his present fleet, another five times as large would come against them.
So laying hold of this pretext, as soon as they saw the Ionians refusing
to behave well, they deemed it for their advantage to preserve their own
buildings, sacred and profane.

When therefore the Phnicians sailed against them, the Ionians drew out
their ships in line to oppose them; but when they came near and opposed
each other, I am unable to affirm with certainty who of the Ionians
proved themselves cowards, or brave men, in this sea-fight; for they
mutually accuse each other. The Samians however are said at that moment
to have hoisted sail, in pursuance of their agreement with aces, and
steered out of the line to Samos, with the exception of eleven ships;
the captains of which stayed and fought, refusing to obey their
commanders; and for this action the commonwealth of the Samians
conferred upon them the honor of having their names and ancestry
engraved on a column, as those who had proved themselves valiant men;
and this column now stands in the forum. The Lesbians also, seeing those
stationed next them flee, did the same as the Samians; and most of the
Ionians followed their example. Of those that persisted in the battle,
the Chians were most roughly handled, as they displayed signal proofs of
valor, and would not act as cowards. They had contributed one hundred
ships, and on board each of them forty chosen citizens served as
marines; and though they saw most of the confederates abandoning the
common cause, they disdained to follow the example of their treachery;
but choosing rather to remain with the few allies, they continued the
fight, cutting through the enemies' line, until, after they had taken
many of the enemies' ships, they lost most of their own. The Chians then
fled to their own country with the remainder of their fleet. Those
Chians whose ships were disabled in the fight, took refuge in Mycale,
ran their ships aground, and left them there, and marched over-land
across the continent. On their return they entered the territory of
Ephesus, and arrived near the city by night, at a time when the women
were celebrating the Thesmophoria; thereupon, the Ephesians, not having
before heard how it had fared with the Chians, and seeing an army enter
their territory, thinking they were certainly robbers, and had come to
seize their women, rushed out in a body, and slew the Chians. When
Dionysius the Phocan perceived that the affairs of the Ionians were
utterly ruined, he took three of the enemies' ships and sailed away, not
indeed to Phoca, well knowing that it would be enslaved with the rest
of Ionia, but directly to Phnicia; and there having disabled some
merchantmen, and obtained great wealth, he sailed to Sicily, where he
established himself as a pirate, attacking none of the Greeks, but only
Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians.

When the Persians had conquered the Ionians in the sea-fight they
besieged Miletus by land and sea, undermined the walls, and bringing up
all kinds of military engines against it, took it completely, in the
sixth year after the revolt of Aristagoras. They reduced the city to
slavery, so that the event coincided with the oracle delivered
concerning Miletus. For when the Argives consulted the oracle at Delphi
respecting the preservation of their city, a double answer was given;
part concerning themselves, and the addition concerning the Milesians.
The part relating to the Argives I will mention when I come to that part
of the history; the words the Pythian uttered relative to the Milesians,
who were not present, were these: "Then Miletus, contriver of wicked
deeds, thou shalt become a feast and a rich gift to many: thy wives
shall wash the feet of many long-haired masters, and our temple at
Didymi shall be tended by others." These things befell the Milesians at
that time; for most of the men were killed by the Persians, who wear
long hair, their women and children were treated as slaves, and the
sacred enclosure at Didymi, both the temple and the shrine, were
pillaged and burnt. Of the riches in this temple I have frequently made
mention in other parts of my history. Such of the Milesians as were
taken alive were afterward conveyed to Susa; and King Darius did them no
harm, but settled them on the Red Sea, in the city of Ampe, near by
which the Tigris falls into the sea. Of the Milesian territory, the
Persians themselves retained the parts round the city and the plain; the
mountainous parts they gave to the Carians of Pedasus to occupy. When
the Milesians suffered this at the hands of the Persians, the Sybarites,
who inhabited Laos and Scydrus, did not show equal sympathy. But when
Sybaris was taken by the Crotonians, all the Milesians of every age had
shaved their heads and displayed marks of deep mourning: for these two
cities had been more strictly united in friendship than any others we
are acquainted with. The Athenians behaved in a very different manner;
for the Athenians made it evident that they were excessively grieved at
the capture of Miletus, both in many other ways, and more particularly
when Phrynichus had composed a drama of the capture of Miletus, and
represented it, the whole theatre burst into tears, and fined him a
thousand drachmas[23] for renewing the memory of their domestic
misfortunes; and they gave order that henceforth no one should act this
drama.

[Illustration: AMPHITHEATRE AT POLA.]

While Histius the Milesian was near Byzantium, intercepting the trading
ships of the Ionians that sailed out of the Pontus, news was brought him
of what had taken place at Miletus; he therefore intrusted his affairs
on the Hellespont to Bisaltes, son of Apollophanes, of Abydos, and with
the Lesbians sailed to Chios, and engaged with a garrison of Chians,
that would not admit him, at a place called Cli in the Chian territory,
and killed great numbers of them. The deity is wont to give some
previous warning when any great calamities are about to befall city or
nation, and before these misfortunes great warnings happened to the
Chians. For in the first place, when they sent to Delphi a band of one
hundred youths, two only of them returned home, for a pestilence seized
and carried off the remaining ninety-eight. In the next place, a little
before the sea-fight, a house in the city fell in upon some boys, as
they were learning to read, so that of one hundred and twenty boys one
only escaped. After this, the sea-fight following, threw the city
prostrate; and after the sea-fight Histius with the Lesbians came upon
them; and as the Chians had been much shattered, he easily reduced them
to subjection. From there Histius proceeded to attack Thasus with a
large body of Ionians and olians; and while he was besieging Thasus,
Harpagus, the Persian, general of a considerable army, who, happening to
be in those parts, engaged with him after his landing, took Histius
himself prisoner, and destroyed the greater part of his army.

Now if, when Histius was taken prisoner, he had been conducted to king
Darius, in my opinion, he would have suffered no punishment, and the
king would have forgiven him his fault. But for this very reason, lest
by escaping he should again regain his influence with the king,
Artaphernes, Governor of Sardis, and Harpagus, who received him as soon
as he was conducted to Sardis, impaled his body on the spot, and
embalmed the head and sent it to Darius at Susa. Darius blamed those
that had done it, because they had not brought him alive into his
presence, and gave orders that they should wash and adorn the head of
Histius, and inter it honorably, as the remains of a man who had been a
great benefactor to himself and the Persians.

The naval force of the Persians wintered near Miletus. In the second
year it set sail for the islands lying near the continent, Chios,
Lesbos, and Tenedos, which it easily subdued. When they took any one of
these islands, the barbarians netted the inhabitants in this manner:
Taking one another by the hand, they would extend from the northern to
the southern sea, and so march over the island, hunting out the
inhabitants. They also took the Ionian cities on the continent with the
same ease; but did not net the inhabitants, for that was impossible.
Thus the Ionians were for the third time reduced to slavery; first by
the Lydians, then twice successively by the Persians. The naval force,
departing from Ionia, reduced all the places on the left of the
Hellespont as one sails in; and all the cities of the Chersonese, except
Cardia, they subdued.

Till that time Miltiades, son of Cimon, was tyrant of these cities,
Miltiades, son of Cypselus, having formally acquired this government in
the following manner: The Thracian Dolonci possessed this Chersonese;
these Dolonci, being pressed in war by the Apsynthians, sent their kings
to Delphi to consult the oracle concerning the war; the Pythian answered
them, "that they should take that man with them to their country to
found a colony, who after their departure from the temple should first
offer them hospitality." Accordingly the Dolonci, going by the sacred
way, went through the territories of the Phocians and Botians, and when
no one invited them, turned out of the road toward Athens. At that time
Pisistratus had the supreme power at Athens; but Miltiades, son of
Cypselus, had considerable influence; he was of a family that maintained
horses for the chariot-races, and was originally descended from acus
and gina, but in later times was an Athenian, Philus, son of Ajax,
having been the first Athenian of that family. This Miltiades, being
seated in his own portico, and seeing the Dolonci passing by, wearing a
dress not belonging to the country, and carrying javelins, called out to
them: and upon their coming to him, he offered them shelter and
hospitality. They, grateful for their entertainment, made known to him
the whole oracle, and entreated him to obey the deity. Their words
persuaded Miltiades as soon as he heard them, for he was troubled with
the government of Pisistratus, and desired to get out of his way. He
therefore immediately set out to Delphi to ask the oracle whether he
should do that which the Dolonci requested of him. The Pythian having
bade him do so, Miltiades took with him all such Athenians as were
willing to join in the expedition, and set sail with the Dolonci, and
took possession of the country; and they who introduced him appointed
him tyrant. He, first of all, built a wall on the isthmus of the
Chersonese, from the city of Cardia to Pactya, in order that the
Apsynthians might not be able to injure them by making incursions into
their country. The width of this isthmus is thirty-six stades; and from
this isthmus the whole Chersonese inward is four hundred and twenty
stades in length. Miltiades next made war upon the Lampsacenians, who
laid an ambush and took him prisoner. But Miltiades was well known to
Crsus, who, on hearing of this event, sent and commanded the
Lampsacenians to release Miltiades; if not, he threatened that he would
destroy them like a pine-tree. The Lampsacenians, uncertain as to what
was the meaning of this saying, discovered, with some difficulty, from
one of the elders, that the pine alone of all trees, when cut down, does
not send forth any more shoots, but perishes entirely: whereupon the
Lampsacenians, dreading the power of Crsus, set Miltiades at liberty.
He accordingly escaped by means of Crsus, and afterward died childless,
having bequeathed the government and his property to Stesagoras, his
brother by the same mother. When he was dead the Chersonesians
sacrificed to him, as is usual to a founder, and instituted equestrian
and gymnastic exercises, in which no Lampsacenian is permitted to
contend. The war with the Lampsacenians still continuing, it also befell
Stesagoras to die childless; being struck on the head with an axe in the
prytaneum, by a man who in pretence was a deserter, but was in fact an
enemy, and a very vehement one.

Upon the death of Stesagoras, the Pisistratid sent Miltiades, son of
Cimon, and brother of Stesagoras who had died, with one ship to the
Chersonese, to assume the government; they had also treated him with
kindness at Athens, as if they had not been parties to the death of his
father Cimon. Miltiades having arrived in the Chersonese, kept himself
at home under color of honoring the memory of his brother Stesagoras,
and the principal persons of all the cities assembled together from
every quarter, and came in a body with the intention of condoling with
him, whereupon they were all thrown into chains by him. Thus Miltiades
got possession of the Chersonese, maintaining five hundred auxiliaries,
and married Hegesipyle, daughter of Olorus, King of the Thracians. This
Miltiades, son of Cimon, had lately arrived in the Chersonese, but
having heard that the Phnicians were at Tenedos, he loaded five
triremes with the property he had at hand, and sailed away for Athens.
But when he had set out from the city of Cardia, he sailed through the
gulf of Melas, and as he was passing by the Chersonese, the Phnicians
fell in with his ships. Miltiades himself escaped with four of the ships
to Imbrus, but the fifth the Phnicians pursued and took; of this ship,
Metiochus, the eldest of the sons of Miltiades, happened to be
commander, whom the Phnicians took together with the ship. When they
heard that he was son of Miltiades, they took him up to the king,
thinking that they should obtain great favor for themselves, because
Miltiades had given an opinion to the Ionians advising them to comply
with the Scythians, when the Scythians requested them to loose the
bridge and return to their own country. But Darius did the young man no
injury, but many favors; for he gave him a house and an estate, and a
Persian wife, by whom he had children, who were reckoned among the
Persians. Meantime Miltiades arrived safely at Athens.




CHAPTER II.

EXPEDITION OF MARDONIUS.


In the beginning of the spring, the other generals were dismissed by the
king, but Mardonius, son of Gobryas, went down to the coast, taking with
him a very large land-army, and a numerous naval force: he was young in
years, and had lately married king Darius' daughter, Artazostra. When he
arrived in Cilicia, and had gone in person on board ship, he proceeded
with the rest of the fleet, while the other generals led the land-army
to the Hellespont. When Mardonius reached Ionia, he did a thing, which,
when I mention it, will be a matter of very great astonishment to those
Greeks, who cannot believe that Otanes, one of the seven Persians, gave
an opinion that it was right for the Persians to be governed by a
democracy; for Mardonius deposed the tyrants of the Ionians, and
established democracies in the cities.

After this, Darius made trial of what were the intentions of the Greeks,
whether to make war with him or to deliver themselves up. He therefore
despatched heralds, appointing different persons to go to different
parts throughout Greece, with orders to ask earth and water for the
king, the Persian method of demanding submission. These he sent to
Greece, and despatched other heralds to the tributary cities on the
coast, with orders to build ships of war and transports for horses. To
the heralds who came to Greece many of the inhabitants of the continent
gave what the Persian demanded, as did all the islanders also, and
moreover the ginet, whereupon the Athenians forthwith threatened them,
thinking that the ginet had given earth and water out of ill-will
toward themselves, in order that they might make war on them in
conjunction with the Persian. And the Athenians laying hold of the
pretext, sent to Sparta to accuse the ginet of what they had done as
betraying Greece.

The Spartans say, that once upon a time there lived in Lacedmon one
Glaucus, son of Epicydes. This man attained to the first rank in all
respects, and bore the highest character for justice of all who at that
time dwelt at Lacedmon. In the course of time a certain Milesian came
to Sparta and wished to have a conference with him, and said: "I am a
Milesian, and have come, Glaucus, with the desire of profiting by your
justice, of which, throughout all the rest of Greece, and particularly
in Ionia, there is great talk. Ionia is so continually exposed to great
dangers, while with us one can never see the same persons retaining
property. Having, therefore, reflected and deliberated on these things,
I determined to change half of my whole substance into silver and
deposit it with you, being well assured that with you, it would be safe.
Do you, then, take this money, and preserve these tokens; and whosoever
possessing these shall demand it back again, restore it to him." So
spoke the stranger who came from Miletus, and Glaucus received the
deposit, on the condition mentioned. After a long time had elapsed, the
sons of this man who had deposited the money came to Sparta, and
addressed themselves to Glaucus, showed the tokens, and demanded back
the money. Glaucus repulsed them, answering as follows: "I don't
remember the matter, nor any of the circumstances you mention; but if I
can recall it to my mind, I am willing to do every thing that is just;
if I really received it, I wish to restore it correctly; but if I have
not received it at all, I shall have recourse to the laws of the Greeks
against you. I therefore defer settling this matter with you for four
months from the present time." The Milesians in disappointment departed,
taking greatly to heart the loss of their money. But Glaucus went to
Delphi to consult the oracle; and, when he asked the oracle whether he
should make a booty of the money by an oath, the Pythian assailed him in
the following words: "Glaucus, son of Epicydes, thus to prevail by an
oath, and to make a booty of the money, will be a present gain. But
there is a nameless son of Perjury, who has neither hands nor feet; he
pursues swiftly, until he has seized and destroyed the whole race, and
all the house of him who has falsely sworn. But the race of a man who
keeps his oath is afterward more blessed." Glaucus, hearing this,
entreated the god to pardon the words he had spoken. But the Pythian
said, that to tempt the god, and to commit the crime, were the same
thing. So Glaucus sent for the Milesian strangers, and restored them the
money. There is at present not a single descendant of Glaucus, nor any
house which is supposed to have belonged to Glaucus; but he is utterly
extirpated from Sparta. Thus it is right to have no other thought
concerning a deposit, than to restore it when it is demanded.

[Illustration: RUINS OF AN ANCIENT TEMPLE IN CORINTH.]

The ginet, offended at what they considered a great affront, prepared
to revenge themselves on the Athenians: and as the Athenians happened to
have a five-benched galley at Sunium, they formed an ambuscade and took
the ship "Theoris"[24] filled with the principal Athenians, and put the
men in chains. The Athenians, thus treated by the ginet, no longer
delayed to devise all sorts of plans against them. Now there was in
gina an eminent man named Nicodromus, son of Cnthus; incensed against
the ginet on account of his former banishment from the island, and now
hearing that the Athenians were preparing to do a mischief to the
ginet, he entered into an agreement with the Athenians for the
betrayal of gina, mentioning on what day he would make the attempt, and
on what it would be necessary for them to come to his assistance.
Nicodromus, according to his agreement, on the appointed day seized that
which is called the old town. The Athenians, however, did not arrive at
the proper time, for they happened not to have a sufficient number of
ships to engage with the ginet; and while they were entreating the
Corinthians to furnish them with ships, their plan was ruined. The
Corinthians, for they were then on very friendly terms with them, at
their request supplied the Athenians with twenty ships, hiring them out
at a nominal price of five drachm each; because by their laws they were
forbidden to give them for nothing. The Athenians, taking these and
their own, manned seventy ships in all, sailed to gina, and arrived one
day after that agreed upon. When the Athenians did not arrive at the
proper time, Nicodromus embarked on shipboard and made his escape from
gina; and others of the ginet accompanied him, to whom the Athenians
gave Sunium for a habitation; and they, sallying from thence, plundered
the ginet in the island. This, however, happened subsequently. In the
meantime the most wealthy of the ginet overpowered the common people,
who, together with Nicodromus, had revolted against them, and led them
out to execution. On this occasion they incurred a guilt, which they
were unable to expiate by any contrivance, as they were ejected out of
the island before the goddess became propitious to them. For having
taken seven hundred of the common people prisoners, they led them out to
execution; and one of them, who escaped from his bonds, fled to the
porch of Ceres the lawgiver, and seizing the door-handle, held it fast;
when they were unable by dragging to tear him away, they cut off his
hands, and so took him away; and the hands were left sticking on the
door-handles. So did the ginet treat their own people. But when the
Athenians arrived with their seventy ships, they came to an engagement,
and being conquered in the sea-fight, they called upon the same persons
as before for assistance, that is, on the Argives. They, however, would
not any longer succor them, but complained that the ships of the
ginet, having been forcibly seized by Cleomenes, had touched on the
territory of Argos, and the crews had disembarked with the
Lacedmonians. Some men had also disembarked from Sicyonian ships in the
same invasion; and a penalty was imposed upon them by the Argives, to
pay a thousand talents, five hundred each. The Sicyonians, acknowledging
that they had acted unjustly, made an agreement to pay one hundred
talents, and be free from the rest; but the ginet would not own
themselves in the wrong, and were very obstinate. On this account,
therefore, none of the Argives were sent by the commonwealth to assist
them; but, on their request, volunteers went to the number of a
thousand; a general, whose name was Eurybates, and who had practised for
the pentathlon, led them. The greater number of these never returned
home, but were slain by the Athenians in gina. The general, Eurybates,
engaging in single combat, killed three several antagonists in that
manner, but was slain by the fourth, Sophanes of Decelea. But the
ginet attacked the fleet of the Athenians when they were in disorder,
and obtained a victory, and took four of their ships with the men on
board.




CHAPTER III.

EXPEDITION OF DATIS AND ARTAPHERNES; THE BATTLE
OF MARATHON.


War was accordingly kindled between the Athenians and ginet. But the
Persian pursued his own design, for the servant continually reminded him
to remember the Athenians, and the Pisistratid constantly importuned
him and accused the Athenians; and at the same time Darius was desirous
of subduing those people of Greece who had refused to give him earth and
water. He therefore dismissed Mardonius from his command, because he had
succeeded ill in his expedition; and appointed other generals, whom he
sent against Eretria and Athens, namely, Datis, who was a Mede by birth,
and Artaphernes, son of Artaphernes, his own nephew; and he despatched
them with strict orders to enslave Athens and Eretria, and bring the
bondsmen into his presence. When these generals who were appointed left
the king, and reached the Aleian plain of Cilicia, bringing with them a
numerous and well-equipped army, they encamped there until the whole
naval force required from each people came up: the horse-transports were
also present, which Darius in the preceding year had commanded his
tributaries to prepare. They put the horses on board of these, and
embarked the land-forces in the ships, and sailed for Ionia with six
hundred triremes. From there they did not steer their ships along the
continent direct to the Hellespont and Thrace; but parting from Samos
they bent their course across the Icarian sea, and through the islands,
dreading the circumnavigation of Athos, because in the preceding year,
in attempting a passage that way, they had sustained great loss.

While they were doing this, the Delians also, abandoning Delos, fled to
Tenos; but as the fleet was sailing down toward it, Datis would not
permit the ships to anchor near the island, but further on, off Rhenea;
and he, having ascertained where the Delians were, sent a herald and
addressed them as follows: "Sacred men, why have you fled, forming an
unfavorable opinion of me? For both I myself have so much wisdom, and am
so ordered by the king, that in the region where the two deities[25]
were born, no harm should be done either to the country itself or its
inhabitants. Return, therefore, to your houses, and resume possession of
the island." This message he sent to the Delians by means of a herald;
and afterward heaped up three hundred talents of frankincense upon the
altar, and burnt it. Then Datis sailed with the army first against
Eretria, taking with him both Ionians and olians. But after he had put
out to sea from there, Delos was shaken by an earthquake, as the Delians
say, the first and last time that it was ever so affected. And the deity
assuredly by this portent intimated to men the evils that were about to
befall them. For during the three successive reigns of Darius, son of
Hystaspes, of Xerxes, son of Darius, and of Artaxerxes, son of Xerxes,
more disasters befell Greece than during the twenty generations that
preceded the time of Darius, partly brought upon it by the Persians, and
partly by the chief men amongst them contending for power. So that it is
not at all improbable that Delos should be moved at that time, though
until then unmoved; and in an oracle respecting it, it had been thus
written: "I will move even Delos, although hitherto unmoved." And in the
Greek language these names mean: Darius, "one who restrains"; Xerxes, "a
warrior"; and Artaxerxes, "a mighty warrior."

After the barbarians had parted from Delos, and touched at the islands,
they took with them men to serve in the army, and carried away the sons
of the islanders for hostages. Having subdued Eretria, and rested a few
days, they sailed to Attica, pressing the inhabitants very close, and
expecting to treat them in the same way as they had the Eretrians. Now
as Marathon was the spot in Attica best adapted for cavalry, and nearest
to Eretria, they gathered their forces there. When the Athenians heard
of this, they also sent their forces to Marathon: and ten generals led
them, of whom the tenth was Miltiades, whose father, Cimon, had been
banished from Athens by Pisistratus. During his exile, it was his good
fortune to obtain the Olympic prize in the four-horse chariot race, the
honor of which victory he transferred to Miltiades, his brother by the
same mother; afterward, in the next Olympiad, being victorious with the
same mares, he permitted Pisistratus to be proclaimed victor, and
returned home under terms. But after he had gained a third Olympic prize
with the same mares, it happened that he died by the hands of the sons
of Pisistratus, when Pisistratus himself was no longer alive; they slew
him near the Prytaneum, having placed men to waylay him by night. Cimon
was buried in front of the city, beyond that which is called the road to
Cla, and opposite him these same mares were buried, which won the three
Olympic prizes. Stesagoras, the elder son of Cimon, was at that time
being educated by his uncle in the Chersonese, but the younger by Cimon
himself at Athens, and he had the name of Miltiades, from Miltiades, the
founder of the Chersonese. At that time, then, this Miltiades, coming
from the Chersonese, and having escaped a twofold death, became general
of the Athenians; for in the first place, the Phnicians pursued him as
far as Imbros, exceedingly desirous of seizing him and carrying him up
to the king; and in the next, when he had escaped them, and had returned
to his own country, and thought himself in safety, his enemies attacked
him, and brought him before a court of justice, to prosecute him for
tyranny in the Chersonese. These also he escaped, and was at length
appointed general of the Athenians by the choice of the people.

And first, while the generals were yet in the city, they despatched a
herald to Sparta, one Phidippides, an Athenian, a courier by profession,
who arrived in Sparta on the following day after his departure from the
city of the Athenians, and on coming in presence of the magistrates,
said: "Lacedmonians, the Athenians entreat you to assist them, and not
to suffer the most ancient city among the Greeks to fall into bondage to
barbarians; for Eretria is already reduced to slavery, and Greece has
become weaker by the loss of a renowned city." He delivered the message
according to his instructions, and they resolved to assist the
Athenians; but it was out of their power to do so immediately, as they
were unwilling to violate the law; for it was the ninth day of the
current month; and they said they could not march out until the moon's
circle should be full.

Meanwhile the traitor Hippias, son of Pisistratus, had guided the
barbarians to Marathon. He first of all landed the slaves from Eretria
on the island of the Styreans, called gilia; and next he moored the
ships as they came to Marathon, and drew up the barbarians as they
disembarked on land. But as he was busied in doing this, it happened
that he sneezed and coughed more violently than he was accustomed; and
as he was far advanced in years, several of his teeth were loose, so
that through the violence of his cough he threw out one of these teeth.
It fell on the sand, and he used every endeavor to find it; but when the
tooth could nowhere be found, he drew a deep sigh, and said to the
bystanders: "This country is not ours, nor shall we be able to subdue
it; whatever share belongeth to me, my tooth possesses."

When the Athenians were drawn up in a place sacred to Hercules, the
Platans came to their assistance with all their forces. For the
Platans had given themselves up to the Athenians, as the Athenians had
already undergone many toils on their account.

The opinions of the Athenian generals were divided: one party not
consenting to engage, "because they were too few to engage with the army
of the Medes"; and the others, among whom was Miltiades, urging them to
give battle. There was an eleventh voter who was appointed minister of
war among the Athenians, who had an equal vote with the generals, and at
that time Callimachus of Aphidn was minister of war. To him Miltiades
came and spoke as follows: "It now depends on you, Callimachus, either
to enslave Athens, or, by preserving its liberty, to leave a memorial of
yourself to every age, such as not even Harmodius and Aristogeiton have
left. For the Athenians were never in so great danger from the time they
were first a people. If they succumb to the Medes, it has been
determined what they are to suffer when delivered up to Hippias; but if
the city survives, it will become the first of the Greek cities. How,
then, this can be brought to pass, and how the power of deciding the
matter depends on you, I will now proceed to explain. The opinions of us
generals, who are ten, are equally divided; the one party urging that we
should engage, the other that we should not. Now, if we do not engage, I
expect that some great dissension arising amongst us will shake the
minds of the Athenians so as to induce them to a compliance with the
Medes. But if we engage before any dastardly thought arises in the minds
of some of the Athenians, if the gods are impartial, we shall be able to
get the better in the engagement. All these things now entirely depend
on you. For if you will support my opinion, your country will be free,
and the city the first in Greece; but if you join with those who would
dissuade us from an engagement, the contrary of the advantages I have
enumerated will fall to your lot." Miltiades, by these words, gained
over Callimachus, and it was determined to engage. Afterward the
generals whose opinions had been given to engage, as the command for the
day devolved upon each of them, gave it up to Miltiades; but though he
accepted it, he would not come to an engagement before his own turn to
command came.

The war-minister, Callimachus, commanded the right wing, for the law at
that time was so settled among the Athenians; the Platans were drawn
out last of all, occupying the left wing. Now, ever since that battle,
when the Athenians offer sacrifices and celebrate the public festivals
which take place every five years, the Athenian herald prays, saying:
"May blessings attend both the Athenians and the Platans." Their line
was equal in extent to the Medic line, but the middle of it was but few
deep, and there the line was weakest, while each wing was strong in
numbers. When they were drawn up, and the victims were favorable, the
Athenians, at the order to charge, advanced against the barbarians in
double-quick time; and the space between them was not less than eight
stades. The Persians, seeing them charging at full speed, prepared to
receive them, laughing at their madness when they saw that they were so
few in number, and that they rushed on at full speed without cavalry or
archers. The Athenians, however, when they engaged in close ranks with
the barbarians, fought in a manner worthy of record. For they, the first
of all the Greeks whom we know of, charged the enemy at full speed, and
first endured the sight of the Medic garb and the men that wore it; for
until that time the very name of the Medes was a terror to the Greeks.
The battle at Marathon lasted a long time: and in the middle of the
line, where the Persians themselves and the Sac were arrayed, the
barbarians were victorious, and having broken the line, pursued to the
interior; but in both wings the Athenians and the Platans were
victorious. Here they allowed the defeated portion of the barbarians to
flee; and having united both wings, they fought with those who had
broken their centre until at last the Athenians were victorious. They
followed the Persians in their flight, cutting them to pieces, till,
reaching the shore, they called for fire and attacked the ships.

In this battle the brave war-minister, Callimachus, was killed, and
among the generals, Stesilaus, son of Thrasylas, perished; Cyngeirus,
son of Euphorion, laid hold of a ship's stern and had his hand severed
by an axe and fell; and besides, many other distinguished Athenians were
slain. In this manner the Athenians made themselves masters of seven
ships: but with the rest the barbarians rowed rapidly back, and after
taking off the Eretrian slaves from the island in which they had left
them, sailed round Sunium, wishing to anticipate the Athenians in
reaching the city. But the Athenians marched with all speed to the
assistance of the city, and reached it before the barbarians arrived;
and as they had come from the precinct of Hercules at Marathon, they
took up their station in another precinct of Hercules at Cynosarges. The
barbarians, having laid to with their fleet off Phalerum for a time,
soon sailed away for Asia. In this battle at Marathon there died of the
barbarians about six thousand four hundred men; and of the Athenians,
one hundred and ninety-two. An Athenian, Epizelus, son of Cuphagoras,
while fighting in the medley, and behaving valiantly, was deprived of
sight, though wounded in no part of his body, nor struck from a
distance; and he continued to be blind from that time for the remainder
of his life. I have heard that he used to give the following account of
his loss. He thought that a large heavy-armed man stood before him,
whose beard shaded the whole of his shield; that this spectre passed by
him, and killed the man that stood by his side, smiting him with this
loss as it passed.

King Darius, before the Eretrians were made captive, harbored a deep
resentment against them, as the Eretrians had been the first to begin
acts of injustice: but when he saw them brought into his presence, and
subject to his power, he did them no other harm, but settled them in the
Cissian territory at a station of his own, the name of which is
Ardericca; it is two hundred and ten stades distant from Susa, and forty
from the well which produces three different substances; for asphalt,
salt, and oil are drawn up from it, in the following manner. It is
pumped up by means of a swipe, and, instead of a bucket, half of a
wine-skin is attached to it; having dipped down with this, a man draws
it up and then pours the contents into a receiver; and being poured from
this into another, it assumes three different forms: the asphalt and the
salt immediately become solid, but the oil they collect, and the
Persians call it rhadinace; it is black and emits a strong odor. Here
king Darius settled the Eretrians; who, even to my time, occupied this
territory, retaining their ancient language. Two thousand of the
Lacedmonians came to Athens after the full moon, making such haste to
be in time, that they arrived in Attica on the third day after leaving
Sparta. Too late for the battle, they, nevertheless, proceeded to
Marathon, saw the slain, commended the Athenians and their achievement,
and returned home.

After the defeat of the Persians at Marathon, Miltiades, asked of the
Athenians seventy ships, and troops, and money, without telling them
what country he purposed to invade, but saying that he would make them
rich if they would follow him, for he would take them to a country, from
which they would easily bring an abundance of gold, and the Athenians,
elated by these hopes, granted the ships. Miltiades, accordingly took
the troops and sailed against Paros, alleging as a pretext, that the
Parians had first begun hostilities by sending a trireme with the
Persians to Marathon. But his real reason was that he had a grudge
against the Parians on account of Lysagoras, son of Tisias, who was a
Parian by birth and who had calumniated him to Hydarnes the Persian.
Miltiades arrived with his forces and besieged the Parians, who were
driven within their walls; and sent a herald to them to demand a hundred
talents, saying, that if they did not furnish him that sum, he would not
draw off his army until he had destroyed them. The Parians never
entertained the thought of giving Miltiades any money; but devised means
by which they might defend the city; and in several parts where the wall
was most exposed to attack, they raised it, during the night, to double
its former height. Up to this point of the story all the Greeks agree;
but after this the Parians themselves say that it happened as follows.
That when Miltiades was in a state of perplexity, a captive woman, by
birth a Parian, and named Timo, conferred with him; she was an inferior
priestess of the infernal goddesses. When she came into the presence of
Miltiades, she advised him, if he deemed it of great consequence to take
Paros, to act as she should suggest. Following out her suggestions he
came to the mound before the city and leaped over the fence of Ceres
Thesmophora, as he was unable to open the door; and went to the temple,
for the purpose either to move some of the things that may not be moved,
or to do something or other, I know not what. He was just at the door,
when suddenly a thrill of horror came over him, and he went back by the
same way; and in leaping over the fence his thigh was dislocated, or his
knee was hurt. Miltiades, in a bad plight, sailed back home, neither
bringing money to the Athenians, nor having reduced Paros, but having
besieged it for six and twenty days, and ravaged the island. When the
Parians were informed that Timo, the priestess of the goddesses, had
directed Miltiades, they desired to punish her, and sent deputies to the
oracle at Delphi, as soon as they were relieved from the siege, to
inquire whether they should put to death the priestess of the goddesses,
for having made known to the enemy the means of capturing the country,
and for having discovered to Miltiades sacred things, which ought not to
be revealed to the male sex. But the Pythian did not allow them, but
said, "that Timo was not to blame for this, but that it was fated
Miltiades should come to a miserable end, and she had appeared to him as
a guide to misfortune." When Miltiades returned from Paros, the
Athenians were loud in their complaints against him, especially
Xanthippus, son of Ariphron, who brought a capital charge against
Miltiades before the people, and prosecuted him for deception.
Miltiades, though present in person, made no defence, through inability,
as his thigh had begun to mortify. But while he lay on a couch his
friends made a defence for him, dwelling much on the battle that had
been fought at Marathon, and on the capture of Lemnos; since he had
taken Lemnos, and inflicted vengeance on the Pelasgians, and had given
it up to the Athenians. The people so far favored him as to acquit him
of the capital offence, but fined him fifty talents for the injury he
had done. Miltiades soon after ended his life by the mortification of
his thigh, and his son Cimon paid the fifty talents.

[22] The Greek words, literally translated, mean "on a razor's edge."

[23] There is very good reason to believe that this fine was really
imposed for the adoption of a modern theme by Phrynichus, when hitherto
only the gods and heroes had been permissible subjects.

[24] The "Theoris" was a vessel which was sent every year to Delos to
offer sacrifice to Apollo.

[25] Apollo and Diana.




_BOOK VII. POLYMNIA._




CHAPTER I.

DEATH OF DARIUS AND REIGN OF XERXES.


When the news of the battle fought at Marathon reached Darius, who was
before much exasperated with the Athenians on account of the attack upon
Sardis, he grew still more eager to prosecute the war against Greece. He
therefore immediately sent messengers to the several cities, and bade
them prepare an army much greater than they had furnished before, and
ships, horses, corn, and transports. Asia was thrown into agitation
during the space of three years, the bravest men being enrolled and
prepared for the purpose of invading Greece. In the fourth year the
Egyptians, who had been subdued by Cambyses, revolted from the Persians;
whereupon Darius only became the more eager to march against both. Just
then a violent dissension arose between the sons of Darius concerning
the sovereignty; for by the customs of the Persians he was obliged to
nominate his successor before he marched out on any expedition. Before
Darius became king, he had three sons born to him by his former wife,
the daughter of Gobryas; and after his accession to the throne, four
others by Atossa, daughter of Cyrus. Of the former, Artabazanes was the
eldest; of those born after, Xerxes: and these two, not being of the
same mother, were at variance. Artabazanes urged that he was the eldest
of all the sons, and that it was the established usage among all men
that the eldest son should succeed to the sovereignty: on the other
hand, Xerxes alleged that he was son of Atossa, daughter of Cyrus, and
that it was Cyrus who had acquired freedom for the Persians. At this
very juncture, when Darius had not yet declared his opinion, Demaratus,
son of Ariston, happened to come up to Susa, deprived of his kingly
office at Sparta, and having imposed on himself a voluntary exile from
Lacedmon. This man went to Xerxes, as report has it, and advised him to
say in addition to what he had already said, that "he was born after his
father Darius had become king, and was possessed of the empire of the
Persians; whereas Artabazanes was born while he was yet a private
person; wherefore it was not reasonable or just that any other should
possess that dignity in preference to himself." "Since in Sparta also,"
Demaratus continued to suggest, "this custom prevailed, that if some
children were born before their father became king, and one was born
subsequently, when he had come to the throne, this last-born son should
succeed to the kingdom." Darius acknowledged this point, and declared
Xerxes king. But it appears to me that even without this suggestion
Xerxes would have been made king, for Atossa had unbounded influence. So
Darius appointed Xerxes to be king over the Persians, and prepared to
march. But just at this juncture, and in the year after the revolt of
Egypt, Darius himself, while making preparations, died, having reigned
thirty-six years in all; nor was he able to avenge himself either on the
Egyptians, who had revolted, or on the Athenians; and when Darius was
dead, the kingdom devolved on his son Xerxes.

Xerxes was at first by no means inclined to make war against Greece, but
he levied forces for the reduction of Egypt. Mardonius, son of Gobryas,
who was cousin to Xerxes, and son of Darius' sister, and who had the
greatest influence with him of all the Persians, constantly held the
following language: "Sire, it is not right that the Athenians, who have
already done so much mischief to the Persians, should go unpunished?
However, for the present, finish the enterprise you have in hand; and
when you have quelled the insolence of Egypt, lead your army against
Athens; that you may acquire a good reputation among men, and any one
for the future may be cautious of marching against your territory." This
language was used by him for the purpose of revenge, but he frequently
made the following addition to it, that "Europe was a very beautiful
country, and produced all kinds of cultivated trees,and was very
fertile, and worthy to be possessed by the king alone of all mortals."
Mardonius was desirous of new enterprises, and wished to be himself
governor of Greece, and in time he persuaded Xerxes to do as he advised.
Xerxes, in the second year after the death of Darius, reduced all Egypt
to a worse state of servitude than ever under Darius, and committed the
government to Achmenes, his brother.

He then convoked an assembly of the principal Persians, that he might
hear their opinions, and make known his intentions to them all. "Men of
Persia," said Xerxes, "I learn from older men that we have never
remained inactive since we wrested the sovereign power from the Medes,
and Cyrus overthrew Astyages; but the deity has led the way, and we have
followed his guidance to our advantage. What deeds Cyrus and Cambyses
and my father Darius have achieved, and what nations they have added to
our empire, no one need mention to you who know them well. But since I
have succeeded to the throne, I have carefully considered how I may not
fall short of my predecessors in honor, nor acquire less additional
power to the Persians."

"I have now called you together, that I may communicate to you what I
purpose to do. I intend to throw a bridge over the Hellespont, and to
march an army through Europe against Greece, that I may punish the
Athenians for the injuries they have done to the Persians and to my
father. You have already seen Darius preparing to make war against those
people; but he died, and had it not in his power to avenge himself. But
I, in his cause and that of the other Persians, will not rest till I
have taken and burnt Athens; for they began by doing acts of injustice
against my father and me. First they came to Sardis, with Aristagoras
the Milesian, our servant, and burnt down the groves and the temples.
You all know well enough how they treated us on our making a descent on
their territory, when Datis and Artaphernes led our forces. For these
reasons, therefore, I have resolved to make war upon them. And I am sure
that if we subdue them, and their neighbors, who inhabit the country of
Pelops the Phrygian, we shall make the Persian territory co-extensive
with the air of heaven, for the sun will not look down upon any land
that borders on ours. When I shall have informed you of the time, it
will be the duty of each of you to come promptly. And whosoever shall
appear with the best-appointed troops, to him I will give such presents
as are accounted most honorable in our country."

After this, when Xerxes had resolved to undertake the expedition, a
vision appeared to him in his sleep, which the magi interpreted to
signify that all mankind should serve him. Xerxes imagined that he was
crowned with the sprig of an olive tree, whose branches covered the
whole earth; and that afterward the crown that was placed on his head
disappeared. After the magi had given this interpretation, all the
Persians who were assembled departed immediately to their own
governments, and used all diligence to execute what had been ordered,
every man hoping to obtain the proposed reward; Xerxes thus levied his
army, searching out every region of the continent. He was employed four
whole years in assembling his forces and providing things necessary for
the expedition. In the fifth he began his march with a vast multitude of
men. For this was by far the greatest of all the expeditions with which
we are acquainted. What nation did not Xerxes lead out of Asia against
Greece? what stream, except that of great rivers, did not his army drink
dry? Some supplied ships; others were ordered to furnish men for the
infantry, others cavalry, some transports for horses, together with men
to serve in the army; others had to furnish long ships for the bridges,
and others provisions and vessels.

And first of all, as those who had first attempted to double Mount Athos
had met with disaster, preparations were made for nearly three years to
cut Athos off by a canal. Triremes were stationed at Eleus in the
Chersonese, and from there men of every nation from the army dug under
the lash. They went in succession; and the people who dwelt round Athos
dug also. Bubares, son of Megabazus, and Artachus, son of Artus, both
Persians, presided over the work. Athos is a vast and celebrated
mountain, stretching into the sea, and inhabited by men. Where the
mountain terminates toward the continent, it is in the form of a
peninsula connected with the continent by an isthmus of about twelve
stades; this is a plain with hills of no great height from the sea of
the Acanthians to the sea which is opposite Torone. On this isthmus
stands Sana, a Grecian city; and on Athos itself are the cities of Dion,
Olophyxus, Acrothoon, Thyssus, and Cleon. To make the excavation the
barbarians divided the ground among the several nations, having drawn a
straight line near the city of Sana. When the trench was deep, some
stood at the bottom and continued to dig, and others handed the soil
that was dug out to men who stood above on ladders; they again in turn
handed it to others, until they reached those that were at the top; the
last carried it off and threw it away. In the case of all, except the
Phnicians, the brink of the excavation fell in and gave double labor,
for as they made the upper and the lower opening of equal dimensions,
this must necessarily happen. But the Phnicians, who show their skill
in other works, did so especially in this; for they dug the portion that
fell to their share, making the upper opening of the trench twice as
large as it was necessary for the trench itself to be; and as the work
proceeded they contracted it gradually, so that when they came to the
bottom the work was equal in width to the rest; near adjoining is a
meadow, where they had a market and bazaar, and great abundance of meal
was brought to them from Asia. According to my deliberate opinion,
Xerxes ordered this excavation to be made from motives of ostentation,
wishing to display his power, and to leave a memorial of himself. For
though it was possible, without any great labor, to have drawn the ships
over the isthmus, he commanded them to dig a channel for the sea of such
a width that two triremes might pass through rowed abreast. And the same
persons, to whom the excavation was committed, were ordered also to
throw a bridge over the river Strymon. He also caused cables of papyrus
and of white flax to be prepared for the bridges, and ordered the
Phnicians and Egyptians to lay up provisions for the army, that neither
the men nor the beasts of burden might suffer from famine on their march
toward Greece, conveying them to various quarters in merchant-ships and
transports from all parts of Asia.

While these men were employed in their appointed task, the whole
land-forces marched with Xerxes to Sardis, setting out from Critalla in
Cappadocia, where it had been ordered that all the troops throughout the
continent should assemble. They crossed the river Halys, entered
Phrygia, and arrived at Celn, where rise the springs of the Mander,
and of another river not less than the Mander, which is called the
Catarractes, which, springing up in the very forum of the Celnians,
discharges itself into the Mander; in this city the skin of Silenus
Marsyas is suspended, which, as the Phrygians report, was stripped off
and suspended by Apollo. In this city Pythius, son of Atys, a Lydian,
being in waiting, entertained the whole army of the king, and Xerxes
himself, with most sumptuous feasts; and he offered to contribute money
toward the expense of the war. Xerxes asked the Persians near him who
this Pythius was, and what riches he possessed, that he made such an
offer. They answered: "O king, this is the person who presented your
father Darius with the golden plane tree and the vine; and he is now the
richest man we know of in the world, next to yourself." Xerxes in
surprise next asked Pythius what was the amount of his wealth. He said:
"O king, as soon as I heard you were coming down to the Grecian sea,
wishing to present you with money for the war, I made inquiry, and found
by computation that I had two thousand talents of silver, and of gold
four millions of Doric staters, lacking seven thousand. These I freely
give you; for myself I have sufficient subsistence from my slaves and
lands." Xerxes, delighted with his offer, replied: "My Lydian friend,
since I left the Persian country I have met with no man to the present
moment who was willing to entertain my army, or who, having come into my
presence, has voluntarily offered to contribute money toward the war.
But you have entertained my army magnificently, and have offered me vast
sums; in return for this, I make you my friend. Keep what you have
acquired, and I will myself make up to you the seven thousand staters
which you lack of four millions. Be careful always to continue such as
you are, and you shall never repent hereafter."

[Illustration: TRIPOLITZA.]

From Phrygia he entered Lydia, crossed the river Mander, and passed by
the city of Callatebus, in which confectioners make honey with tamarisk
and wheat. Xerxes, by the way, met with a plane-tree, which, on account
of its beauty, he presented with golden ornaments, and having committed
it to the care of one of the Immortals,[26] on the next day he arrived
at Sardis, the capital of the Lydians.

In the meanwhile those who were appointed had joined the Hellespont from
Asia to Europe. There is in the Chersonese on the Hellespont, between
the city of Sestos and Madytus, a craggy shore extending into the sea,
directly opposite Abydos. From this shore to Abydos, they had
constructed two bridges, the Phnicians one with white flax, and the
Egyptians the other with papyrus. The distance is seven stades. When the
strait was thus united, a violent storm arose and broke in pieces and
scattered the whole work. When Xerxes heard of this, exceedingly
indignant, he commanded that the Hellespont should be stricken with
three hundred lashes with a scourge, and that a pair of fetters should
be let down into the sea. I have moreover heard that with them he
likewise sent branding instruments to brand the Hellespont. He certainly
charged those who flogged the waters to utter these barbarous and
impious words: "Thou bitter water! thy master inflicts this punishment
upon thee, because thou hast injured him, although thou hadst not
suffered any harm from him. And king Xerxes will cross over thee,
whether thou wilt or not; it is with justice that no man sacrifices to
thee, because thou art both a deceitful and briny river!" He accordingly
commanded them to chastise the sea in this manner, and to cut off the
heads of those who had to superintend the joining of the Hellespont.
They on whom this thankless office was imposed, carried it into
execution; and other engineers constructed bridges in the following
manner. They connected together penteconters and triremes, under the
bridge toward the Euxine sea, three hundred and sixty; and under the
other, three hundred and fourteen, obliquely to the Pontus, but in the
direction of the current of the Hellespont, that it might keep up the
tension of the cables. They then let down very long anchors, some on the
bridge toward the Pontus, on account of the winds that blew from it
within; others on the other bridge toward the west and the gean, on
account of the south and southeast winds. They left an opening as a
passage through between the penteconters, in three places, that any one
who wished might be able to sail into the Pontus in light vessels, and
from the Pontus outward. Having done this, they stretched the cables
from the shore, twisting them with wooden capstans, not as before using
the two kinds separately, but assigning to each two of white flax and
four of papyrus. The thickness and quality was the same, but those of
flax were stronger in proportion, every cubit weighing a full talent.
When the passage was bridged over, they sawed up trunks of trees, equal
in length to the width of the bridge, and laid them upon the extended
cables in regular order, fastening them securely together. They put
brush-wood on the top, and earth over the whole; and having pressed down
the earth, they drew a fence on each side, that the beasts of burden and
horses might not be frightened by looking down upon the sea.

At last the works at the bridges and Mount Athos were completed, as well
as the mounds at the mouths of the canal which had been made on account
of the tide in order that the mouths of the trench might not be choked
up. News was brought that all was ready, and the army, fresh from their
winter at Sardis, set out fully prepared at the beginning of the spring
toward Abydos. But just as they were on the point of starting, the sun
quit his seat in the heavens and disappeared, though there were no
clouds, and the air was perfectly serene, and night ensued in the place
of day. This occasioned Xerxes much uneasiness; but the magi said "The
deity foreshows to the Greeks the extinction of their cities; the sun is
the portender of the future to the Greeks, and the moon to the
Persians." Xerxes, at this, was much delighted, and set out upon his
march. As he was leading his army away, Pythius the Lydian, terrified by
the prodigy in the heavens, and emboldened by the gifts of Xerxes, went
to the king and spoke thus: "Sire, would you indulge me by granting a
boon I wish to obtain, which is easy for you to grant, and of much
importance to me." Xerxes, expecting that he would wish for anything
rather than what he did ask, said that he would grant his request, and
bade him declare what he wanted. "Sire," said he, "I have five sons; and
it happens that they are all attending you in the expedition against
Greece. But pity me, O king, who am advanced in years, and release one
of my sons from the service, that he may take care of me and my
property. Take the other four with you, accomplish your designs, and
return home." Xerxes was highly incensed, and answered: "Base man! hast
thou dared, when I am marching in person against Greece, and taking with
me my children, and brothers, and kinsmen, and friends to make mention
of thy son? thou who art my slave, and who wert bound in duty to follow
me with all thy family, even with thy wife. But I promise to grant your
request; I will leave your dearest son." When he had given this answer,
he immediately commanded to find out the eldest of the sons of Pythius,
and to cut his body into two halves, and to stand one on the right of
the road, and the other on the left, while the army should pass between
them.

This done the army passed between. The baggage-bearers and beasts of
burden first led the way; after them came a host of all nations. When
more than one half of the army had passed, an interval was left that
they might not mix with the king's troops. Before him a thousand
horsemen led the van, chosen from among all the Persians; and next to
them a thousand spearmen, these also chosen from among all, carrying
their lances turned downwards to the earth. After these, ten immense
sacred horses, gorgeously caparisoned, called Nisan, from the plain in
the Medic territory, which produces them; then came the sacred chariot
of Jupiter, drawn by eight white horses, followed by a charioteer on
foot, holding the reins; for no mortal ever ascends this seat. Behind
this came Xerxes himself on a chariot drawn by Nisan horses; and a
charioteer walked at his side, whose name was Patiramphes. In this
manner Xerxes marched out of Sardis, and whenever he thought right, he
used to pass from the chariot to a covered carriage. Behind him marched
a thousand spearmen, the bravest and noblest of the Persians, carrying
their spears in the usual manner; and after them another body of a
thousand horse, chosen from among the Persians; then ten thousand chosen
Persian infantry. Of these, one thousand had golden pomegranates on
their spears instead of ferrules, and they enclosed the others all
round; the nine thousand within had silver pomegranates. Those also that
carried their spears turned to the earth had golden pomegranates, and
those that followed nearest to Xerxes had golden apples. Behind the ten
thousand foot were placed ten thousand Persian cavalry; and after the
cavalry was left an interval of two stades; then the rest of the throng
followed promiscuously.

Once when the army halted during the night under Mount Ida, thunder and
lightning fell upon them, and destroyed a considerable number of the
troops on the spot. At the Scamander, the first river on their march
from Sardis, the stream failed and did not afford sufficient drink for
the army and beasts of burden. Here Xerxes went up to the Pergamus or
citadel of Priam, and sacrificed a thousand oxen to the Ilian Minerva,
and the magi poured out libations in honor of the heroes of the Trojan
War. At Abydos, Xerxes wished to behold the whole army. And there had
been previously erected on a hill at this place, for his use, a lofty
throne of white marble; the people of Abydos had made it, in obedience
to an order of the king. Seated there, he beheld both the land army and
the fleet; he desired also to see a contest take place between the
ships, in which the Sidonian Phnicians were victorious. Exceedingly
gratified he was, both with the contest and the army. But while he was
viewing the whole Hellespont covered by the ships, and all the shores
and the plains of Abydos full of men, he suddenly burst into tears.
Artabanus, his paternal uncle, observed him, and exclaimed: "O king, a
moment ago you pronounced yourself happy, but now you weep." "Alas," he
answered: "Commiseration seized me, when I considered how brief all
human life is, since of these, numerous as they are, not one will be
alive in a hundred years!"

That day they made preparations for the passage over; and on the
following they waited for the sun, as they wished to see it rising, in
the mean time burning all sorts of perfumes on the bridges, and strewing
the road with myrtle branches. When the sun rose, Xerxes poured a
libation into the sea out of a golden cup, and offered up a prayer to
the sun, that no such accident might befall him as would prevent him
from subduing Europe, until he had reached its utmost limits. After the
prayer, he threw the cup into the Hellespont, and a golden bowl, and a
Persian sword, which they call acinace. But I cannot determine with
certainty, whether he dropped these things into the sea as an offering
to the sun, or whether he repented of having scourged the Hellespont,
and presented these gifts to the sea as a compensation. These ceremonies
finished, the infantry and all the cavalry crossed over by that bridge
which was toward the Pontus; and the beasts of burden and the attendants
by that toward the gean. I have heard that Xerxes crossed over last of
all. In seven days and seven nights without a halt his army crossed. On
this occasion it is related, that when Xerxes had crossed over the
Hellespont, a certain Hellespontine said: "O Jupiter, why, assuming the
form of a Persian, and taking the name of Xerxes, do you wish to subvert
Greece, bringing all mankind with you? since without them it was in your
power to do this."

[Illustration: THE TOMB OF JONAH, KONYUNJIK, AND THE RUINS OPPOSITE
MOSUL.]

Doriscus is a shore and extensive plain of Thrace. Through it flows a
large river, the Hebrus. A royal fort had been built, and a Persian
garrison had been established in it by Darius, from the time that he
marched against the Scythians. At Doriscus Xerxes numbered his army. The
whole land forces were found to be seventeen hundred thousand. They were
computed in this manner: having drawn together ten thousand men in one
place, and crowded them as close together as it was possible, they
traced a circle on the outside; removed the ten thousand, threw up a
stone fence on the circle, a yard high, and made others enter within the
enclosed space, until they had in this manner computed all.

The Persians were equipped as follows: On their heads they wore loose
coverings, called tiaras; on the body various-colored sleeved
breastplates, with iron scales like those of fish; and on their legs,
loose trousers; instead of shields they had bucklers made of osiers; and
under them their quivers were hung. They had short spears, long bows,
and arrows made of cane, besides daggers suspended from the girdle on
the right thigh. They had for their general, Otanes, father of Amestris,
wife of Xerxes. They were formerly called Cephenes by the Grecians, but
by themselves and neighbors, Artans. But when Perseus, son of Danae and
Jupiter, came to Cepheus, son of Belus, and married his daughter
Andromeda, he had a son to whom he gave the name of Perses; and from him
they derived their appellation. The Medes marched equipped in the same
manner as the Persians; for the above is a Medic and not a Persian
costume. The Medes had for their general, Tigranes, of the family of the
Achmenid: they were formerly called Arians by all nations; but when
Medea of Colchis came from Athens to these Arians, they also changed
their names. The Assyrians who served in the army had helmets of bronze,
twisted in a barbarous fashion, not easy to describe; and shields and
spears, with daggers similar to those of the Egyptians, besides wooden
clubs knotted with iron, and linen cuirasses. By the Greeks they were
called Syrians, but by the barbarians, Assyrians. Among them were the
Chaldeans; and Otaspes, son of Artachus commanded them. The Bactrians
had turbans on their heads, very much like those of the Medes, and bows
made of cane peculiar to their country, and short spears. The Sac, who
are Scythians, had on their heads caps, which came to a point and stood
erect: they also wore loose trousers, and carried bows peculiar to their
country, and daggers, and also battle-axes, called sagares. The Indians,
clad with garments made of cotton, had bows of cane, and arrows of cane
tipped with iron.

The Arabians wore cloaks fastened by a girdle; and carried on their
right sides long bows which bent backward. The Ethiopians were clothed
in panthers' and lions' skins, and carried long bows, not less than four
cubits in length, made from branches of the palm-tree; and on them they
placed short arrows made of cane, instead of iron, tipped with a stone,
which was made sharp, and of the sort on which they engrave seals.
Besides, they had javelins, and at the tip was an antelope's horn, made
sharp, like a lance; they had also knotted clubs. When they were going
to battle, they smeared one half of their body with chalk, and the other
half with red ochre. The Arabians and Ethiopians who dwell above Egypt
were commanded by Arsames, son of Darius and Artystone, daughter of
Cyrus, whom Darius loved more than all his wives, and whose image he had
made of beaten gold. The Ethiopians from the sun-rise (for two kinds
served in the expedition) were marshalled with the Indians, and did not
at all differ from the others in appearance, except in their language
and their hair. For the eastern Ethiopians are straight-haired; but
those of Libya have hair more curly than that of any other people. These
Ethiopians from Asia were accoutred almost the same as the Indians; but
they wore on their heads skins of horses' heads, as masks, stripped off
with the ears and mane; and the mane served instead of a crest, and the
horses' ears were fixed erect; and as defensive armor they used the
skins of cranes instead of shields. The Libyans marched, clad in
leathern garments, and made use of javelins hardened by fire. They had
for their general, Massages, son of Oarizus. The Paphlagonians joined
the expedition, wearing on their heads plated helmets, and carried small
shields, and not large spears, besides javelins and daggers: and on
their feet they wore boots, peculiar to their country, reaching up to
the middle of the leg. The Thracians wore fox-skins on their heads, and
tunics around their bodies, and over them they were clothed with
various-colored cloaks, and on their feet and legs they had buskins of
fawn-skin, and carried javelins, light bucklers, and small daggers.
These people having crossed over into Asia, were called Bithynians; but
formerly, as they themselves say, were called Strymonians, as they dwelt
on the river Strymon.

These, with very many others, were the nations that marched on the
continent and composed the infantry. Over these and the whole infantry
was appointed as general, Mardonius, son of Gobryas. But of the ten
thousand chosen Persians, Hydarnes was general. These Persians were
called Immortal, for the following reason: If any one of them made a
deficiency in the number, compelled either by death or disease, another
was ready chosen to supply his place; so that they were never either
more or less than ten thousand. The Persians displayed the greatest
splendor of all, and were also the bravest; their equipment was such as
has been described; but besides this, they were conspicuous from having
a great profusion of gold. They also brought with them covered chariots
and a numerous and well-equipped train of attendants. Camels and other
beasts of burden conveyed their provisions, apart from that of the rest
of the soldiers.

[Illustration: BRIDGE OVER THE GORTYNIUS.]

All these nations have cavalry; they did not, however, all furnish
horse, but only the following. First, the Persians, equipped in the same
manner as their infantry, except that on their heads some of them wore
bronze and wrought-steel ornaments. There is a certain nomadic race,
called Sagartians, of Persian extraction and language, who wear a dress
fashioned between the Persian and the Pactyan fashion; they furnished
eight thousand horse, but they are not accustomed to carry arms either
of bronze or iron, except daggers: they use lassos made of twisted
thongs. The mode of fighting of these men is as follows: When they
engage with the enemy they throw out the ropes, which have nooses at the
end, and whatever any one catches, whether horse or man, he drags toward
himself; and they that are entangled in the coils are put to death. The
Arabians had the same dress as their infantry, but all rode camels not
inferior to horses in speed. The number of the horse amounted to eighty
thousand, besides the camels and chariots. All the rest of the cavalry
were marshalled in troops; but the Arabians were stationed in the rear,
as horses cannot endure camels. Armamithres and Tithus, sons of Datis,
were generals of the cavalry. Their third colleague in command,
Pharnuches, had been left at Sardis sick. For as they were setting out
from Sardis he met with a sad accident. When he was mounted, a dog ran
under the legs of his horse, and the horse, frightened, reared and threw
Pharnuches, who vomited blood, and the disease turned to a consumption.
With respect to the horse, his servants immediately led him to the place
where he had thrown his master, and cut off his legs at the knees.

The number of the triremes amounted to twelve hundred and seven.

Persians, Medes, and Sac served as marines on board all the ships. Of
these the Phnicians furnished the best sailing ships, and of the
Phnicians the Sidonians. The admirals of the navy were: Ariabignes, son
of Darius; Prexaspes, son of Aspathines; Megabazus son of Megabates; and
Achmenes, son of Darius. Of the other captains I make no mention, as I
deem it unnecessary, except of Artemisia, whom I most admire, as having,
though a woman, joined this expedition against Greece. Her husband was
dead, but, holding the sovereignty while her son was under age, she
joined the expedition from a feeling of courage and manly spirit, though
there was no necessity for her doing so. Her name was Artemisia, and she
was the daughter of Lygdamis, by birth of Halicarnassus on her father's
side, and on her mother's a Cretan. She commanded the Halicarnassians,
the Coans, the Nisyrians, and the Calyndians, having contributed five
ships: and of the whole fleet, next to the Sidonians, she furnished the
most renowned ships, and of all the allies, gave the best advice to the
king. The cities which I have mentioned as being under her command, I
pronounce to be all of Doric origin; the Halicarnassians being
Trzenians, and the rest Epidaurians.

When Xerxes had numbered his forces, and the army was drawn up he
desired to pass through and inspect them in person. Accordingly he drove
through in a chariot, by each separate nation, made inquiries, and his
secretaries wrote down the answers; until he had gone from one extremity
to the other, both of the horse and foot. When he had finished this, and
the ships had been launched into the sea, Xerxes, in a Sidonian ship,
under a gilded canopy, sailed by the prows of the ships, asking
questions of each, as he had done with the land-forces, and having the
answers written down.

When Xerxes arrived at Therma, he ordered his army to halt. And seeing
from Therma the Thessalonian mountains, Olympus and Ossa, which are of
vast size, and having learnt that there was a narrow pass between them,
through which the river Peneus runs, and hearing that at that spot there
was a road leading to Thessaly, very much wished to sail and see the
mouth of the Peneus. When Xerxes arrived, and beheld its mouth, he was
struck with great astonishment. For several rivers, five of them greatly
noted, the Peneus, the Apidanus, the Onochonus, the Enipeus, and the
Pamisus, meeting together in this plain from the mountains that enclose
Thessaly, discharge themselves into the sea through one channel, and
that a narrow one; but as soon as they have mingled together, from that
spot the names of the other rivers merge in that of the Peneus.[27] The
Thessalians say, that Neptune made the pass through which the Peneus
flows; and their story is probable. For whoever thinks that Neptune
shakes the earth, and that rents occasioned by earthquakes are the works
of this god, on seeing this, would say that Neptune formed it. For it
appears evident to me, that the separation of these mountains is the
effect of an earthquake.




CHAPTER II.

BATTLE OF THERMOPYL.


When the Greeks arrived at the Isthmus they consulted in what way and in
what places they should prosecute the war. The opinion which prevailed
was that they should defend the pass at Thermopyl; for it appeared to
be narrower than that into Thessaly, and at the same time nearer to
their own territories. On the western side of Thermopyl is an
inaccessible and precipitous mountain, stretching to Mount ta; and on
the eastern side of the way is the sea and a morass. In this passage
there are hot baths, which the inhabitants call Chytri, and above these
is an altar to Hercules. A wall had been built in this pass, and
formerly there were gates in it. The Phocians built it through fear,
when the Thessalians came from Thesprotia to settle in the olian
territory which they now possess, apprehending that the Thessalians
would attempt to subdue them; at the same time they diverted the hot
water into the entrance, that the place might be broken into clefts;
having recourse to every contrivance to prevent the Thessalians from
making inroads into their country. Now this old wall had been built a
long time, and the greater part of it had already fallen through age;
but they determined to rebuild it, and in that place to repel the
barbarian from Greece. Very near this road there is a village called
Alpeni, from which they expected to obtain provisions.

[Illustration: CYCLOPEAN WALLS AT CEPHALLOMA.]

The naval forces of Xerxes, setting out from the city of Therma,
advanced with ten of the fastest sailing ships straight to Scyathus,
where were three Greek ships keeping a look-out, a Trzenian an
ginetan, and an Athenian. These, seeing the ships of the barbarians at
a distance, betook themselves to flight. The Trzenian ship, which
Praxinus commanded, the barbarians pursued and soon captured; and then,
having led the handsomest of the marines to the prow of the ship, they
slew him, deeming it a good omen that the first Greek they had taken was
also very handsome. The name of the man that was slain was Leon, and
perhaps he in some measure reaped the fruits of his name. The ginetan
ship, which Asonides commanded, gave them some trouble, Pytheas, son of
Ischenous, being a marine on board, a man who on this day displayed the
most consummate valor; who, when the ship was taken, continued fighting
until he was almost cut to pieces. But when they found that he was not
dead, but still breathed, the Persians who served on board the ships
were very anxious to save him alive, on account of his valor, healing
his wounds with myrrh, and binding them with bandages of flaxen cloth.
And when they returned to their own camp, they showed him with
admiration to the whole army, and treated him well; but the others, whom
they took in this ship, they treated as slaves. Thus, two of the ships
were taken; but the third, which Phormus, an Athenian, commanded, in its
flight ran ashore at the mouth of the Peneus; and the barbarians got
possession of the ship, but not of the men: for as soon as the Athenians
had run the ship aground, they leaped out, and, proceeding through
Thessaly, reached Athens. The Greeks who were stationed at Artemisium
were informed of this event by signal-fires from Scyathus.

As far as Thermopyl, the army of Xerxes had suffered no loss, and the
numbers were at that time, as I find by calculation of those in ships
from Asia, a total of five hundred and seventeen thousand six hundred
and ten. Of infantry there were seventeen hundred thousand, and of
cavalry eighty thousand; to these I add the Arabians who rode camels,
and the Libyans who drove chariots, reckoning the number of twenty
thousand men. Accordingly, the numbers on board the ships and on the
land added together, make up two millions three hundred and seventeen
thousand six hundred and ten, exclusive of the servants that followed,
and the provision ships, and the men that were on board them. But the
force brought from Europe must still be added to this whole number, of
which I suppose that there were three hundred thousand men. So that
these myriads added to those from Asia, make a total of two millions six
hundred and forty one thousand six hundred and ten fighting men. I think
that the servants who followed them, together with those on board the
provision ships and other vessels that sailed with the fleet, were not
fewer than the fighting men, probably more numerous; but supposing them
to be equal in number with the fighting men, Xerxes, son of Darius, led
five millions two hundred and eighty-three thousand two hundred and
twenty men to Thermopyl. This, then, was the number of the whole force
of Xerxes. But the number of women who made bread, wives of officers,
and servants, no one could mention with accuracy; nor of draught-cattle
and other beasts of burden; nor of Indian dogs that followed. I am not
astonished that the streams of some rivers failed; rather is it a wonder
to me how the provisions held out for so many myriads. For I find by
calculation, if each man had a chnix of wheat daily, and no more, one
hundred and ten thousand three hundred and forty medimni must have been
consumed every day; and I have not reckoned the food for the women,
beasts of burden, and dogs. But, of so many myriads of men, not one of
them, for beauty and stature, was more entitled than Xerxes himself to
possess this power.

[Illustration: ISLAND AND CASTLE OF CORFU.]

The Greeks who awaited the Persian at Thermopyl were: of Spartans three
hundred heavy-armed men; of Tegeans and Mantineans one thousand, half of
each; from Orchomenus in Arcadia one hundred and twenty; and from the
rest of Arcadia one thousand; from Corinth four hundred; from Phlius two
hundred men, and from Mycen eighty. These came from Peloponnesus. From
Botia, of Thespians seven hundred, and of Thebans four hundred. In
addition to these, the Opuntian Locrians, being invited, came with all
their forces, and a thousand Phocians. These nations had separate
generals for their several cities; but the one most admired, and who
commanded the whole army, was a Lacedmonian, Leonidas, son of
Anaxandrides, and a descendant of Hercules, who had unexpectedly
succeeded to the throne of Sparta. For as he had two elder brothers,
Cleomenes and Dorieus, he was far from any thought of the kingdom.
However, Cleomenes and Dorieus both died, and the kingdom thus devolved
upon Leonidas. He had chosen the three hundred men allowed by law, and
marched to Thermopyl.

When the Persian came near the pass, the Greeks, alarmed, consulted
about a retreat, and it seemed best to the other Peloponnesians to
retire to Peloponnesus, and guard the Isthmus; but Leonidas, perceiving
the Phocians and Locrians very indignant at this proposition, determined
to stay there, and to despatch messengers to the cities, desiring them
to come to their assistance, as being too few to repel the army of the
Medes. Meantime Xerxes sent a scout on horseback, to see how many they
were, and what they were doing. For while he was still in Thessaly, he
had heard that a small army had been assembled at that spot, whose
leader was Leonidas, of the race of Hercules. When the horseman rode up
to the camp, he reconnoitred, and saw not indeed the whole camp, for it
was not possible that they should be seen who were posted within the
wall, but he had a clear view of those on the outside, whose arms were
piled in front of the wall. At this some of the Lacedmonians were
performing gymnastic exercises, and others combing their hair. On
beholding this he was astonished, but having ascertained their number,
he rode back at his leisure, for no one pursued him, and he met with
general contempt. On his return he gave an account to Xerxes of all that
he had seen, who could not comprehend the truth, that the Greeks were
preparing to be slain and to slay to the utmost of their power.

Xerxes let five days pass, constantly expecting that they would betake
themselves to flight. But on the fifth day, as they had not retreated,
but appeared to him to stay through arrogance and rashness, in rage he
sent the Medes and Cissians against them, with orders to take them
alive, and bring them into his presence. When the Medes bore down
impetuously upon the Greeks, many of them fell; others followed to the
charge, and were not repulsed, though they suffered greatly. But they
made it evident to every one, and not least of all to the king himself,
that they were indeed many men, but few soldiers. The engagement lasted
through the day. The Medes, roughly handled, retired; and the Persians
whom the king called "Immortal," and whom Hydarnes commanded, took their
place and advanced to the attack, thinking that they indeed should
easily settle the business. But they succeeded no better than the Medic
troops, but just the same, as they fought in a narrow space, and used
shorter spears than the Greeks, and were unable to avail themselves of
their numbers. The Lacedmonians fought memorably, showing that they
knew how to fight with men who knew not, and whenever they turned their
backs, they retreated in close order; but the barbarians seeing them
retreat, followed with a shout and clamor; then they, being overtaken,
wheeled round so as to front the barbarians and overthrew an
inconceivable number of the Persians; and then some few of the Spartans
themselves fell. So that when the Persians were unable to gain any thing
in their attempt on the pass, by attacking in troops and in every
possible manner, they retired. It is said that during these onsets of
the battle, the king, who witnessed them, thrice sprang from his throne,
being alarmed for his army. On the following day the barbarians fought
with no better success; for considering that the Greeks were few in
number, and expecting that they were covered with wounds, and would not
be able to raise their heads against them any more, they renewed the
contest. But the Greeks were marshalled in companies and according to
their several nations, and each fought in turn, except the Phocians, who
were stationed at the mountain to guard the pathway. Again the Persians
failed and retired.

While the king was in doubt what course to take, Ephialtes, son of
Eurydemus, a Malian, obtained an audience of him, expecting that he
should receive a great reward from the king, and informed him of the
path which leads over the mountain to Thermopyl; and by that means
caused the destruction of those Greeks who were stationed there.
Afterwards, fearing the Lacedmonians, he fled to Thessaly, and a price
was set on his head by the Pylagori, when the Amphictyons were assembled
at Pyl. But some time after, he went down to Anticyra, and was killed
by Athenades, a Trachinian. This Athenades killed him for another
reason, which I shall mention in a subsequent part of my history;[28] he
was however rewarded none the less by the Lacedmonians. Xerxes,
exceedingly delighted with what Ephialtes promised to perform,
immediately despatched Hydarnes with his troops from the camp about the
hour of lamp-lighting.

All night long the Persians marched, and at dawn reached the summit of
the mountain. Here, as I have already mentioned, a thousand heavy-armed
Phocians kept guard, to defend their own country, and to secure the
pathway. The whole mountain was covered with oaks; there was a perfect
calm, and as a considerable rustling took place from the leaves strewn
under foot, the Phocians sprang up and put on their arms, just as the
barbarians made their appearance. Hit by many thick-falling arrows, the
Phocians fled to the summit of the mountain, prepared to perish. But the
Persians took no further notice of the Phocians, but marched down the
mountain with all speed.

[Illustration: BRIDGE AT CORFU.]

To the Greeks at Thermopyl, the augur Megistias, having inspected the
sacrifices, first made known the death that would befall them in the
morning; certain deserters afterwards came and brought intelligence of
the circuit the Persians were taking while it was yet night; and,
thirdly, the scouts running down from the heights, as soon as day
dawned, brought the same intelligence. It had been announced to the
Spartans, by the oracle of Apollo, when they went to consult concerning
this war, "that either Lacedmon must be overthrown by the barbarians,
or their king perish." This answer the prophetess gave in hexameter
verses to this effect:

  "Hear me, ye men of spacious Lacedmon!
  Either your glorious town must be destroyed,
  By the fell hand of warriors sprung from Perseus,
  Or else the confines of fair Lacedmon
  Must mourn a king of Heracleidan race,
  For all the strength of lions or of bulls
  Is nought to him who has the strength of Zeus;
  And never shall that monarch be restrained
  Until he takes your city or your king."

Xerxes poured out libations at sun-rise, waited a short time, and began
his attack about the time of full market, as he had been instructed by
Ephialtes. The Greeks with Leonidas, marching out as if for certain
death, now advanced much farther than before into the wide part of the
defile. For the fortification of the wall had protected them, on the
preceding day, in the narrow part. But now engaging outside the narrows,
great numbers of the barbarians fell. The officers of the companies from
behind, with scourges, flogged every man, constantly urging them
forward, so that many of them falling into the sea, perished, and many
more were trampled alive under foot by one another; and no regard was
paid to any that perished. The Greeks, knowing that death awaited them
at the hands of those who were going round the mountain, were desperate,
and regardless of their own lives, displayed the utmost possible valor
against the barbarians. Already were most of their javelins broken, and
they had begun to despatch the Persians with their swords. In this part
of the struggle fell Leonidas, fighting valiantly, and with him other
eminent Spartans, whose names, seeing they were deserving men, I have
ascertained; indeed I have ascertained the names of the whole three
hundred. On the side of the Persians, also, many other eminent men fell
on this occasion, amongst them two sons of Darius, Abrocomes and
Hyperanthes, fighting for the body of Leonidas; and there was a violent
struggle between the Persians and Lacedmonians, until at last the
Greeks rescued it by their valor, and four times repulsed the enemy.
Thus the contest continued until the Greeks heard that those with
Ephialtes were approaching. Then they retreated to the narrow part of
the way, and, passing beyond the wall, came and took up their position
on the rising ground, all in a compact body, with the exception of the
Thebans: the rising ground is at the entrance where the stone lion now
stands to the memory of Leonidas. On this spot they defended themselves,
first with their swords, then with their hands and teeth, until the
barbarians overwhelmed them with missiles in front, and from above, and
on every side.

[Illustration: PLAINS OF ARGOS.]

Dieneces, a Spartan, is said to have been the bravest man. They relate
that before the engagement with the Medes, having heard a Trachinian
say, that when the barbarians let fly their arrows, they would obscure
the sun by the multitude of their shafts, so great were their numbers,
he replied, not at all alarmed: "That's good; we shall have the
pleasure, then, of fighting in the shade." In honor of the slain, who
were buried on the spot where they fell, and of those who died before,
these inscriptions have been engraved upon stones above them; the first:

  "From Peloponnesus came four thousand men;
  And on this spot fought with three hundred myriads."

The second was in honor of the three hundred Spartans:

  "Go, stranger! tell the Lacedmonians, here
  We lie, obedient to their stern commands!"

An engraved monument was also erected to Megistias the augur, by his
friend Simonides, and was as follows:

  "The monument of famed Megistias,
  Slain by the Medes what time they passed the Sperchius;
  A seer, who though he knew impending fate,
  Would not desert the gallant chiefs of Sparta."

Two of these three hundred, Eurytus and Aristodemus, had been dismissed
from the camp by Leonidas, and were lying at Alpeni desperately
afflicted with a disease of the eyes. But when Eurytus heard of the
circuit made by the Persians, he called for his arms and ordered his
helot to lead him to the combatants; and, while the slave in terror ran
away, his brave half-blind master rushed into the midst of the throng
and perished; but Aristodemus, failing in courage, was left behind. Now
if it had happened that Aristodemus had returned sick to Sparta, or if
both had gone home together, in my opinion the Spartans would not have
shown any anger against them. But since one of them perished, and the
other, who had only the same excuse, refused to die, they must needs get
exceedingly angry with Aristodemus. On his return to Lacedmon he was
met with insults and infamy. Not one of the Spartans would either give
him fire or converse with him: and he was jeered and hooted at by the
boys who called him "Aristodemus the coward." However, in the battle of
Plata he removed all the disgrace that attached to him, for he earned
the title of the bravest of the Spartans, and recklessly lost his life.
Xerxes after the massacre passed through among the dead; and having
heard that Leonidas was king and general of the Lacedmonians, he
commanded them to cut off his head, and fix it upon a pole. It is clear
to me from many other proofs, and not least of all from this, that king
Xerxes was more highly incensed against Leonidas during his life, than
against any other man; for otherwise he would never have violated the
respect due to his dead body; since the Persians, most of all men with
whom I am acquainted, are wont to honor men who are brave in war.

[26] One of the ten thousand chosen men called Immortals, of whom we
shall hear more hereafter.

[23] Literally, "the river Peneus gaining the victory as to the name,
causes the others to be nameless."

[28] The promised account is no where given in any extant writings of
the historian.




_BOOK VIII. URANIA._




CHAPTER I.

THE INVASION OF ATTICA AND THE BATTLE OF SALAMIS.


The Greek fleet from Artemisium put in at Salamis at the request of the
Athenians, who wished to remove their children and wives out of Attica,
and consult what measures were to be taken. The Athenians caused
proclamation to be made, "that every one should save his children and
family by the best means he could." Thereupon the greatest part sent
away their families to Trzen, some to gina, and others to Salamis.
They used all diligence to remove them to a place of safety, from a
desire to obey the oracle, but more particularly for the following
reason. The Athenians say that a large serpent used to live in the
temple as a guard to the Acropolis; they used to do it honor by placing
before it its monthly food, consisting of a honey-cake: this honey-cake
in former time had always been consumed, but now it remained untouched.
When the priestess made this known, the Athenians, with more readiness,
abandoned the city, since even the goddess had forsaken the Acropolis.
As soon as every thing had been deposited in a place of safety, they
sailed to the encampment. Many more ships were assembled together than
had fought at Artemisium, and from a greater number of cities. The same
admiral commanded them as at Artemisium, Eurybiades, son of Euryclides,
a Spartan, though he was not of the royal family. The Athenians,
however, furnished by far the most and the best sailing ships. The whole
number of ships besides the penteconters, amounted to three hundred and
seventy-eight.

When the leaders from the various cities met together at Salamis, they
held a council, in which Eurybiades proposed that any one who chose
should deliver his opinion, where he thought it would be most
advantageous to come to an engagement by sea, of all the places of which
they were still in possession: for Attica was already given up. Most of
the opinions of those who spoke coincided, that they should sail to the
Isthmus, and fight before Peloponnesus; alleging this reason, that if
they should be conquered by sea while they were at Salamis, they would
be besieged in the island, where no succor could reach them; but if at
the Isthmus, they might escape to their own cities.

[Illustration: ANCIENT GREEK WALLS RESTORED.]

While the commanders from Peloponnesus were debating these matters, an
Athenian arrived with intelligence, that the barbarian had entered
Attica, and was devastating the whole of it by fire. The army with
Xerxes were thus three months en route from the passage over the
Hellespont, till they arrived at Athens. They took the city, deserted of
inhabitants, but found a few of the Athenians in the temple, with the
treasurers of the temple and some poor people; who, having fortified the
Acropolis with planks and stakes, tried to keep off the invaders: they
had not withdrawn to Salamis, partly through want of means, and moreover
they thought they had found out the meaning of the oracle which the
Pythian delivered to them, that the wooden wall "should be impregnable";
imagining, that this was the refuge according to the oracle, and not the
ships. The Persians, posting themselves on the hill opposite the
Acropolis, which the Athenians call the Areopagus, wrapped tow round
their arrows, and setting fire to it, shot them at the fence. But those
Athenians who were besieged, still defended themselves, though driven to
the last extremity, and the fence had failed them; nor, when the
Pisistratid proposed them, would they listen to terms of capitulation;
but still defending themselves, they contrived other means of defence,
and when the barbarians approached the gates, they hurled down large
round stones; so that Xerxes was for a long time kept in perplexity, not
being able to capture them. At length, in the midst of these
difficulties, an entrance was discovered by the barbarians; for it was
necessary, according to the oracle, that all Attica, on the continent,
should be subdued by the Persians. In front of the Acropolis, but behind
the gates and where no one kept guard, nor would ever have expected that
any man would ascend, there some of them ascended near the temple of
Cecrops' daughter Aglauros. When the Athenians saw that the enemy were
in the Acropolis, some threw themselves down from the wall and perished,
and others took refuge in the recess of the temple. But the Persians who
had ascended first turned to the gates, opened them, and put the
suppliants to death: and when all were thrown prostrate, they pillaged
the temple and set fire to the whole Acropolis.

The Greeks at Salamis, when intelligence was brought them how matters
stood in Athens, were thrown into such consternation, that some of the
generals would not wait until the subject before them was decided on,
but rushed to their ships and hoisted sail, as about to hurry away; by
such of them as remained it was determined to come to an engagement
before the Isthmus. Night came on, and they, being dismissed from the
council, went on board their ships. Thereupon Mnesiphilus, an Athenian,
inquired of Themistocles, on his return to his ship, what had been
determined on by them. And being informed by him that it was resolved to
conduct the ships to the Isthmus, and to come to an engagement before
the Peloponnesus, he said, "If they remove the ships from Salamis, you
will no longer fight for any country; for they will each betake
themselves to their cities; and neither will Eurybiades nor any one else
be able to detain them, so that the fleet should not be dispersed; and
Greece will perish through want of counsel. But, if there is any
possible contrivance, go and endeavor to annul the decree, if by any
means you can induce Eurybiades to alter his determination, so as to
remain here." The suggestion pleased Themistocles exceedingly; and
without answer he went to the ship of Eurybiades, and said that he
wished to confer with him on public business. He desired him to come on
board his ship, and say what he wished. Thereupon Themistocles, seating
himself by him, repeated all that he had heard from Mnesiphilus, making
it his own, and adding much more, until he prevailed on him, by
entreaty, to leave his ship, and assemble the commanders in council. The
upshot of the matter was that Themistocles persuaded the generals in
council to remain and fight at Salamis. Day came, and at sunrise an
earthquake took place on land and at sea. They determined to pray to the
gods, and to invoke the acid as allies. For having prayed to all the
gods, they forthwith, from Salamis, invoked Ajax and Telamon; and sent a
ship to gina for acus, and the acidae. In the mean time, all the
admirals and captains of Xerxes' fleet advised engaging in a sea-fight,
except Artemisia, who spoke as follows: "Tell the king from me,
Mardonius, that I say this. It is right that I, sire, who proved myself
by no means a coward in the sea-fight off Euba, and performed
achievements not inferior to others, should declare my real opinion, and
state what I think best for your interest. Therefore I say this, abstain
from using your ships, nor risk a sea-fight; for these men are as much
superior to your men by sea, as men are to women. And why must you run a
risk by a naval engagement? Have you not possession of Athens, for the
sake of which you undertook this expedition, and have you not the rest
of Greece? They will not be able to hold out long against you; but will
soon disperse, and fly to their cities."

Xerxes was very much pleased with the opinion of Artemisia; he had
before thought her an admirable woman, but now he praised her much more.
However, he gave orders to follow the advice of the majority in this
matter, thinking that they had behaved ill at Euba on purpose, because
he was not present. He now prepared in person to behold them engaging by
sea.[29]

Meanwhile, those at Salamis were growing alarmed, and wondered at the
imprudence of Eurybiades; till at last their discontent broke out
openly, and a council was called, and much was said on the subject. Some
said that they ought to sail for the Peloponnesus, and hazard a battle
for that, and not stay and fight for a place already taken by the enemy;
but the Athenians, ginet, and Megareans, declared that they should
stay there and defend themselves. Thereupon, Themistocles, when he saw
his opinion was overruled by the Peloponnesians, went secretly out of
the council, and despatched a man in a boat to the encampment of the
Medes instructing him what to say: his name was Sicinnus, and he was a
domestic, and preceptor to the children of Themistocles. After these
events, Themistocles got him made a Thespian, when the Thespians
augmented the number of their citizens, and gave him a competent
fortune. He, arriving in the boat, spoke as follows to the generals of
the barbarians: "The general of the Athenians has sent me, unknown to
the rest of the Greeks, (for he is in the interest of the king, and
wishes that your affairs may prosper, rather than those of the Greeks,)
to inform you that the Greeks, in great consternation, are deliberating
on flight; and you have now an opportunity of achieving the most
glorious of all enterprises, if you do not suffer them to escape. For
they do not agree among themselves, nor will they oppose you; but you
will see those who are in your interest, and those who are not, fighting
with one another." Having delivered this message to them, he immediately
departed. As these tidings appeared to them worthy of credit, they
immediately landed a considerable number of Persians on the little
island of Psyttalea, lying between Salamis and the continent; and, when
it was midnight, they got their western wing under way, drawing it in a
circle toward Salamis, and those who were stationed about Ceos and
Cynosura got under way and occupied the whole passage as far as Munychia
with their ships, so that the Greeks might have no way to escape, but,
being shut up in Salamis, might suffer punishment for the conflicts at
Artemisium; and they landed the Persians at the little island of
Psyttalea for this reason: that, when an engagement should take place,
as they expected the greater part of the men and wrecks would be driven
there, they might save the one and destroy the other. These things they
did in silence, that the enemy might not know what was going on.

I am unable to speak against the truth of oracles, when I think of the
remarkable oracle of Bacis: "When they shall bridge with ships the
sacred shore of "Diana with the golden sword," and sea-girt Cynosura,
having with mad hope destroyed beautiful Athens, then divine Vengeance
shall quench strong Presumption, son of Insolence, when thinking to
subvert all things. For bronze shall engage with bronze, and Mars shall
redden the sea with blood. Then the far-thundering son of Saturn and
benign victory shall bring a day of freedom to Greece." After such a
prediction and its fulfilment, I neither dare myself say any thing in
contradiction to oracles, nor allow others to do so.

All this night there was a great altercation between the generals at
Salamis. They did not yet know that the barbarians had surrounded them
with their ships. They supposed that they were in the same place where
they had seen them stationed during the day. While the generals were
disputing, Aristides, son of Lysimachus, crossed over from the gina. He
was an Athenian, but had been banished by ostracism. From what I have
heard of his manner of life, I consider him to have been the best and
most upright man in Athens. He, standing at the entrance of the council,
called Themistocles out, who was not indeed his friend, but his most
bitter enemy; yet from the greatness of the impending danger, he forgot
that, and called him, for he had already heard that those from
Peloponnesus were anxious to get the ships under way for the Isthmus.
When Themistocles came out, Aristides spoke as follows: "It is right
that we should strive, both on other occasions, and particularly on
this, which of us shall do the greatest service to our country. I assure
you, that to say little or much to the Peloponnesians about sailing from
here is a waste of breath; for I, an eye-witness, tell you, now, even if
they would, neither the Corinthians, nor Eurybiades himself, will be
able to sail away; for we are on all sides enclosed by the enemy. Go in,
and acquaint them with this." But Themistocles bade Aristides go in
himself and convey the tidings. This he did, but the generals would not
even then give credence to his report until there arrived a trireme of
Tenians that had deserted, which Pantius, son of Socimenes, commanded,
and which brought an account of the whole truth. For that action the
name of the Tenians was engraved on the tripod at Delphi, among those
who had defeated the barbarian. With this ship that came over at
Salamis, and with the Lemnian before, off Artemisium, the Grecian fleet
was made up to the full number of three hundred and eighty ships; for
before it wanted two of that number.

Day dawned, and when they had mustered the marines, Themistocles, above
all the others, harangued them most eloquently. His speech was entirely
taken up in contrasting better things with worse, exhorting them to
choose the best of all those things which depended on the nature and
condition of man. As soon as the trireme from gina, which had gone to
fetch the acid returned the Greeks got all their ships under way. The
barbarians immediately fell upon them. Now all the other Greeks began to
back water and make for the shore; but Aminias of Pallene, an Athenian,
being carried onward, attacked a ship; and his ship becoming entangled
with the other, and the crew not being able to clear, the rest thereupon
came to the assistance of Aminias and engaged. Thus the Athenians say
the battle commenced; but the ginet affirm that the ship which went to
gina to fetch the acid, was the first to begin. It is also said, that
a phantom of a woman appeared to them, that she cheered them on, so that
the whole fleet of Greeks heard her, after she had first reproached them
in these words: "Dastards, how long will you back water?" Opposite the
Athenians the Phnicians were drawn up, for they occupied the wing
toward Eleusis and westward; opposite the Lacedmonians, the Ionians
occupied the wing toward the east and the Pirus. Of these some few
behaved ill on purpose, in compliance with the injunctions of
Themistocles. The greater part of the ships were run down at Salamis;
some being destroyed by the Athenians, others by the ginet. For the
Greeks fought in good order, in line, but the barbarians were neither
properly formed nor did any thing with judgment. However they proved
themselves to be far braver on this day than off Euba, every one
exerting himself vigorously, and dreading Xerxes; for each thought that
he himself was observed by the king.

I am unable to say with certainty how each of the barbarians or Greeks
fought; but with respect to Artemisia, the following incident occurred,
by which she obtained still greater credit with the king. For when the
king's forces were in great confusion, the ship of Artemisia was chased
by an Attic ship, and not being able to escape, she resolved upon a
stratagem. For being pursued by the Athenian, she bore down upon a
friendly ship, manned by Calyndians, and with Damasithymus himself, king
of the Calyndians, on board; whether she had any quarrel with him while
they were at the Hellespont, I am unable to say, or whether she did it
on purpose, or whether the ship of the Calyndians happened by chance to
be in her way; however, she ran it down, and sunk it, and by good
fortune gained a double advantage to herself. For when the captain of
the Attic ship saw her bearing down on a ship of the barbarians, he
concluded Artemisia's ship to be either a Greek or one that had deserted
from the enemy and was assisting them, and so turned aside and attacked
others. Thus she escaped, and in consequence of it became still more in
favor with Xerxes. For it is said that Xerxes, looking on, observed her
ship making the attack, and that some near him said: "Sire, do you see
how well Artemisia fights; she has sunk one of the enemy's ships?"
Whereupon he asked if it was in truth the exploit of Artemisia; they
answered "that they knew the ensign of her ship perfectly well." But
they thought that it was an enemy that was sunk; for no one of the crew
of the Calyndian ship lived to tell the tale and accuse her. And it is
related that Xerxes exclaimed: "My men have become women, and my women
men."

In this battle perished the admiral, Ariabignes, son of Darius, and
brother of Xerxes, and many other illustrious men of the Persians and
Medes, and the other allies; but only a very few of the Greeks: for as
they knew how to swim, they whose ships were destroyed, and who did not
perish in actual conflict, swam safe to Salamis; whereas, many of the
barbarians, not knowing how to swim, perished in the sea. When the
foremost ships were put to flight, then the greatest number were
destroyed; for those who were stationed behind, endeavoring to pass on
with their ships to the front, that they, too, might give the king some
proof of their courage, fell foul of their own flying ships. The
following event also occurred in this confusion. Some Phnicians, whose
ships were destroyed, went to the king and accused the Ionians of
destroying their ships and betraying him. It, however, turned out that
the Ionian captains were not put to death, but that those Phnicians who
accused them, received the following reward. For while they were yet
speaking, a Samothracian ship bore down on an Athenian ship and sunk it.
Just then an ginetan ship, coming up, sunk the ship of the
Samothracians. But the Samothracians being javelin-men, by hurling their
javelins, drove the marines from the ship that had sunk them, and
boarded and got possession of it. This action saved the Ionians: for
when Xerxes saw them perform so great an exploit, he turned round upon
the Phnicians, and ordered their heads to be struck off, that they who
had proved themselves cowards, might no more accuse those who were
braver.

The barbarians turned to flight, and sailing away towards Phalerus, the
ginet waylaid them in the strait, and performed actions worthy of
record. For the Athenians in the rout ran down both those ships that
resisted and those that fled; and the ginet, those that sailed away
from the battle: so that when any escaped the Athenians they fell into
the hands of the ginet.

In this engagement the ginet obtained the greatest renown; and next,
the Athenians. Aristides, of whom I made mention a little before as a
most upright man, in this confusion that took place about Salamis, took
with him a considerable number of heavy-armed men, who were stationed
along the shore of the Salaminian territory and were Athenians by race,
landed them on the island of Psyttalea, and put to the sword all the
Persians who were on that little island.




CHAPTER II.

XERXES' RETREAT.


When the sea-fight was ended, the Greeks hauled on shore at Salamis all
the wrecks that still happened to be there and held themselves ready for
another battle, expecting the king would still make use of the ships
that survived. But a west wind carrying away many of the wrecks, drove
them on the shore of Attica, which is called Colias, so as to fulfil
both all the other oracles delivered by Bacis and Musus concerning this
battle, and also that relating to the wrecks which were drifted on this
shore, which many years before had been delivered by Lysistratus, an
Athenian augur, but had not been understood by any of the Greeks: "The
Colian women shall broil their meat with oars."

When Xerxes saw the defeat he had sustained he was afraid that some of
the Ionians might suggest to the Greeks, or might themselves resolve to
sail to the Hellespont, for the purpose of breaking up the bridges, and
shut him up in Europe. So he planned immediate flight. But wishing that
his intention should not be known either to the Greeks or his own
people, he pretended to throw a mound across to Salamis. He fastened
together Phnician merchantmen, that they might serve instead of a raft
and a wall, and made preparation for war, as if about to fight another
battle at sea. Every body who saw him thus occupied, was firmly
convinced that he had seriously determined to stay and continue the war,
except Mardonius, who was well acquainted with his design. At the same
time Xerxes despatched a messenger to the Persians, to inform them of
the misfortune that had befallen him. There is nothing mortal that
reaches its destination more rapidly than these couriers of the
Persians. They say that as many days as are occupied in the whole
journey, so many horses and men are posted at regular intervals; neither
snow nor rain, nor heat, nor night, prevents them from performing their
appointed stage as quickly as possible. The first courier delivers his
orders to the second, the second to the third, and so it passes
throughout, being delivered from one to the other, just like the
torch-bearing among the Greeks, which they perform in honor of Vulcan.
The first message that reached Susa, with the news that Xerxes was in
possession of Athens, caused so great joy among the Persians who had
been left behind, that they strewed all the roads with myrtle, burnt
perfumes, and gave themselves up to sacrifices and festivity. But the
arrival of the second messenger threw them into such consternation, that
they all rent their garments, and uttered unbounded shouts and
lamentations, laying the blame on Mardonius, not so much grieved for the
ships as anxious for Xerxes himself. And this the Persians continued to
do until Xerxes himself arrived home.

[Illustration: CELES RIDDEN BY A CUPID.]

Mardonius, seeing Xerxes much afflicted by the defeat at Salamis, and
suspecting he was meditating a retreat, thus addressed the king: "Sire,
do not think you have suffered any great loss in consequence of what has
happened; for the contest with us does not depend on wood alone, but on
men and horses. Be not discouraged; for the Greeks have no means of
escape from rendering an account of what they have done now and
formerly, and from becoming your slaves. If you have resolved not to
stay here, return to Susa, and take with you the greatest part of the
army; but give me three hundred thousand picked men and I will deliver
Greece to you reduced to slavery." Xerxes, delighted and relieved,
granted Mardonius his request. As to Xerxes himself, if all the men and
women of the world had advised him to stay, in my opinion, he would not
have yielded, so great was his terror. Leaving Mardonius in Thessaly, he
marched in all haste to the Hellespont; and arrived at the place of
crossing in forty-five days, bringing back no part of his army, so to
speak. Wherever, and among whatever nation, they happened to be
marching, they seized and consumed their corn; but if they found no
fruit, overcome by hunger, they ate up the herbage as it sprung from the
ground, and from sheer hunger stripped off the bark of trees, and
gathered leaves, both of wild and cultivated plants. But a pestilence
and dysentery falling on the army, destroyed them on their march. Such
of them as were sick, Xerxes left behind, ordering the cities through
which he happened to be passing, to take care of and feed them: some in
Thessaly, others at Siris of Ponia, and in Macedonia. It was here he
had left the sacred chariot of Jupiter, when he marched against Greece,
but he did not receive it back, as he returned; for the Ponians had
given it to the Thracians, and when Xerxes demanded it back, said that
the mares had been stolen, as they were feeding, by the upper Thracians,
who dwell round the sources of the Strymon. There the king of the
Bisalt and of the Crestonian territory, a Thracian, perpetrated a most
unnatural deed; he declared that he would not willingly be a slave to
Xerxes, but he went up to the top of Mount Rhodope, and enjoined his
sons not to join the expedition against Greece. They, however,
disregarded his prohibition, from a desire to see the war, and served in
the army with the Persian: but when they all returned safe, six in
number, their father had their eyes put out for this disobedience.

The Persians, in great haste crossed over the Hellespont to Abydos in
their ships; for they found the rafts no longer stretched across, but
broken up by a storm. While detained there, they got more food than on
their march, and having filled themselves immoderately, and drunk of
different water, a great part of the army that survived, died; the rest
with Xerxes reached Sardis. Another account is also given, that when
Xerxes in his retreat from Athens arrived at Eon on the Strymon, from
there he no longer continued his journey by land, but committed the army
to Hydarnes to conduct to the Hellespont, and he himself went on board a
Phnician ship to pass over to Asia. During his voyage a violent and
tempestuous wind from the Strymon overtook him; the storm increased in
violence, and the ship was overloaded, many of the Persians having
accompanied Xerxes. Then the king, becoming alarmed, calling aloud, and
asked the pilot if there was any hope of safety for them; and he said:
"There is none, sire, unless we get rid of some of this crowd of
passengers." Xerxes, hearing this answer, said: "O Persians, now let
some among you show his regard for the king, for on you my safety seems
to depend." Many having done homage, leapt into the sea, and the ship,
being lighted, thus got safe to Asia. It is added, that Xerxes,
immediately after he landed, presented the pilot with a golden crown,
because he had saved the king's life; but ordered his head to be struck
off, because he had occasioned the loss of many Persians. This story
appears to me not at all deserving of credit, for if such a speech had
been made by the pilot to Xerxes, I should not find one opinion in ten
thousand to deny that the king would have sent down into the hold of the
ship those who were on deck, since they were Persians, and Persians of
high rank, and would have thrown into the sea a number of Phnicians,
equal to that of the Persians.

When the division of the booty, after the battle of Salamis was
completed, the Greeks sailed to the Isthmus, for the purpose of
conferring the palm of valor upon him among the Greeks who had proved
himself most deserving throughout the war. The generals distributed the
ballots at the altar of Neptune, selecting the first and second out of
all; thereupon every one gave his vote for himself, each thinking
himself the most valiant; but with respect to the second place, the
majority concurred in selecting Themistocles. So each had but one vote,
for first place, but Themistocles had a great majority for the second
honor. Though the Greeks, out of envy, would not determine this matter,
but returned to their several countries without coming to a decision,
yet Themistocles was applauded and extolled throughout all Greece, as
being by far the wisest man of the Greeks. Because he was not honored by
those who fought at Salamis, although victorious, he immediately
afterward went to Lacedmon, hoping to be honored there. The
Lacedmonians received him nobly, and paid him the greatest honors. They
gave the prize of valor to Eurybiades, a crown of olive; and of wisdom
and dexterity to Themistocles, also a crown of olive. And they presented
him with the most magnificent chariot in Sparta; praising him highly,
and on his departure, three hundred chosen Spartans, called knights,
escorted him as far as the Tegean boundaries. He is the only man that we
know of whom the Spartans ever escorted on his journey.

Mardonius' first movement was to send Alexander, son of Amyntas, a
Macedonian, as an ambassador to Athens; as well because the Persians
were related to him as because he had been informed that Alexander was a
friend and benefactor of the Athenians. For in this way he thought he
should best be able to gain over the Athenians, having heard that they
were a numerous and valiant people; and besides, he knew that the
Athenians had been the principal cause of the late disaster of the
Persians at sea. If these were won over, he hoped that he should easily
become master at sea, which indeed would have been the case; and on land
he imagined that he was much superior: thus he calculated that his power
would get the upper hand of the Greeks. But the Athenians gave the
following answer to Alexander: "We ourselves are aware that the power of
the Medes is far greater than ours; so that there is no need to insult
us with that. But do not you attempt to persuade us to come to terms
with the barbarian, for we will not. Go, and tell Mardonius that the
Athenians say: 'So long as the sun shall continue in the same course as
now, we will never make terms with Xerxes; but we will go out to oppose
him, trusting in the gods, who fight for us, and in the heroes, whose
temples and images he has burned. Know, therefore, if you did not know
it before, that so long as one Athenian is left alive, the fight shall
be continued.'"

[29] Seated on the mountain side upon a magnificent throne of ivory
and gold, as others relate.




_BOOK IX. CALLIOPE._




CHAPTER I.

THE WAR CONTINUED; BATTLE OF PLATA AND SIEGE OF THEBES.


When Alexander returned and made known to Mardonius the answer of the
Athenians, he set out from Thessaly, and led his army in haste against
Athens; and wherever he arrived from time to time, he joined the people
to his own forces. So far were the leaders of Thessaly from repenting of
what had been before done, that they urged on the Persian much more: and
Thorax of Larissa, who had assisted in escorting Xerxes in his flight,
now openly gave Mardonius a passage into Greece. When the army on its
march arrived among the Botians, the Thebans endeavored to restrain
Mardonius from advancing farther, assuring him that to take up his
station there would be equivalent to subduing the whole of Greece
without a battle. For if the Greeks should continue firmly united, as
they had done before, it would be difficult even for all mankind to
overcome them. "But," they continued, "if you do what we advise, you
will without difficulty frustrate all their plans. Send money to the
most powerful men in the cities; split Greece into parties, and then,
with the assistance of those who side with you, you may easily subdue
those who are not in your interest." But he was infatuated with a
vehement desire to taking Athens a second time, and fondly hoped, by
signal-fires across the islands, to make known to the king while he was
at Sardis, that he was in possession of Athens. When he arrived in
Attica, he did not find the Athenians there; but was informed that most
of them were at Salamis on board their ships. So he took the deserted
city ten months after its capture by the king.

But Mardonius was by no means desirous to stay longer in Attica. He
lingered awhile there to see what the Athenians would do, but neither
ravaged nor injured the Attic territory, being in expectation all along
that they would come to terms. But when he could not persuade them he
withdrew, before the Spartans, under Pausanias, could reach the Isthmus,
having first set fire to Athens, and if any part of the walls, or
houses, or temples happened to be standing, these he threw down and laid
all in ruins. He marched out for the reason that the Attic country was
not adapted for cavalry; and if he should be conquered in an engagement,
there was no way to escape except through a narrow pass, so that a very
small number of men could intercept them. He determined therefore to
retire to Thebes, and to fight near a friendly city, and in a country
adapted for cavalry.

[Illustration: BOTIA.]

The Lacedmonians arrived at the Isthmus and went into camp. When the
rest of the Peloponnesians, who favored the better cause, saw the
Spartans marching out, they thought it would be a disgrace to absent
themselves from the expedition of the Lacedmonians. Accordingly, when
the victims proved favorable, they all marched out from the Isthmus and
advanced to Eleusis. The Athenians crossed over from Salamis, and joined
them there. At Erythr in Botia, they learnt that the barbarians were
encamped on the Asopus, at which they consulted together, and formed
opposite, at the foot of Mount Cithron. When the Greeks did not come
down to the plain, Mardonius sent against them all his cavalry, under
command of Masistius, a man highly esteemed among the Persians. He was
mounted on a Nisan horse, that had a golden bit, and was otherwise
gorgeously caparisoned. When the cavalry rode up to the Greeks, they
charged them in squadrons, and called them women. By chance the
Megarians happened to be stationed in that part which was most exposed,
and there the cavalry chiefly made their attack. The Megarians, being
hard pressed, sent a herald to the Greek generals with this message:
"The Megarians say, We, O confederates, are not able alone to sustain
the Persian cavalry. So far we have held out against them by our
constancy and courage, though hard pressed; but now, unless you will
send some others to relieve us, we must abandon our post." Pausanias
immediately called for volunteers to go to that position, and relieve
the Megarians. When all the others refused, three hundred chosen men of
the Athenians undertook to do it, whom Olympiodorus, son of Lampon,
commanded. After a short but spirited battle, as the cavalry were
charging, the horse of Masistius, being in advance of the others, was
wounded in the flank by an arrow, and in pain, reared and threw
Masistius. As he fell, the Athenians immediately seized his horse and
attacked him. At first they were unable to kill Masistius, he was so
thoroughly armed. Underneath he had a golden cuirass covered with
scales, and over the cuirass a purple cloak. By striking against the
cuirass they did nothing; until one of them, perceiving what was the
matter, pierced him in the eye. So he fell and died. The whole Persian
army, and Mardonius most of all, mourned the loss of Masistius. They cut
off their own hair and that of their horses and beasts of burden, and
gave themselves up to unbounded lamentations. The sound reached over all
Botia, of mourning for the loss of a man who, next to Mardonius, was
most esteemed by the Persians and the king.

The Greeks placed the body on a carriage, and carried it along the
linean object worthy of admiration, on account of its stature and
beautyand the men, leaving their ranks, came out to view Masistius.
After this, they determined to go down toward Plata, for the Platan
territory appeared to be much more convenient for them to encamp in than
the Erythran, as it was better supplied with water. Over the foot of
Mount Cithron near Hysi, into the Platan territory they marched, and
formed in line, nation by nation, near the fountain of Gargaphia, and
the precinct of the hero Androcrates, on slight elevations and the level
plain. The whole Grecian army assembled at Plata, reckoning heavy-armed
and light-armed fighting men, amounted to one hundred and ten thousand.

When the barbarians, with Mardonius, had ceased to mourn for Masistius,
they also marched to the Asopus, which flows by Plata, and on their
arrival were drawn up by Mardonius. Of barbarians there were three
hundred thousand, as has been already shown; but of Greeks who were
allies of Mardonius no one knows the number, for they were not reckoned
up; but, to make a guess, I conjecture that they were assembled to the
number of fifty thousand. These were infantry; the cavalry were
marshalled apart.

On the second day, both sides offered sacrifices. For the Greeks,
Tisamenus, son of Antiochus, was the person who sacrificed, for he
accompanied this army as diviner. The sacrifices were favorable to the
Greeks, if they stood on the defensive; but if they crossed the Asopus,
and began the battle, not so.

[Illustration: COAT OF MAIL.]

To Mardonius, who was very desirous to begin the battle, the sacrifices
were not propitious; but to him also, if he stood on the defensive, they
were favorable: for he too adopted the Greek sacrifices, having for his
diviner Hegesistratus, an Elean, and the most renowned of the Telliad.
This man, before these events, the Spartans had taken and bound for
death, because they had suffered many atrocious things from him. In this
sad condition, as being in peril for his life, and having to suffer many
tortures before death, he performed a deed beyond belief. For as he was
confined in stocks bound with iron, he got possession of a knife, which
had by some means been carried in, and immediately cut off the broad
part of his footthe most resolute deed I ever heard of. Then, as he was
guarded by sentinels, he dug a hole through the wall and escaped to
Tegea, travelling by night, and by day hiding himself in the woods and
tarrying there. Thus, though the Lacedmonians searched for him with
their whole population, on the third night he arrived at Tegea; but they
were struck with great amazement at his daring, when they saw half his
foot lying on the ground, and were not able to find him. In time, cured
of his wounds, he procured a wooden foot, and became an avowed enemy to
the Lacedmonians. However, at last his hatred conceived against the
Lacedmonians did not benefit him; for he was taken by them when acting
as diviner at Zacynthus, and put to death. The death of Hegesistratus
took place after the battle of Plata: but at that time, on the Asopus,
he was hired by Mardonius for no small sum to sacrifice, and was very
zealous, both from hatred to the Lacedmonians and from a love of gain.

Meantime, Timagenides, a Theban, advised Mardonius to guard the passes
of Mount Cithron; saying, that the Greeks were continually pouring in
every day, and that he would intercept great numbers. Eight days had
already elapsed since they had been posted opposite each other; but
Mardonius thought the suggestion good, and as soon as it was night, sent
some cavalry to the passes of Cithron, that lead to Plata, which the
Botians call The Three Heads; but the Athenians, The Heads of Oak. The
horsemen that were sent did not arrive in vain; for issuing on the
plain, they took five hundred beasts carrying provisions from
Peloponnesus to the army, with the men who attended the beasts of
burden. The Persians not only took the booty, but killed without mercy,
sparing neither beast nor man. Two more days passed, neither being
willing to begin the battle; but when the eleventh day after the two
armies had been encamped opposite each other in Plata was almost gone,
and the night was far advanced, and silence appeared to prevail
throughout the camps, Alexander, son of Amyntas, who was general and
king of the Macedonians, rode up on horseback to the sentries of the
Athenians, and desired to confer with their generals. Most of the
sentries remained at their posts, while some ran to the generals, and
told them, "that a man had come on horseback from the camp of the Medes,
who uttered not a word more, but, naming the generals, said he wished to
confer with them." They immediately repaired to the out-posts, and
Alexander addressed them as follows: "O Athenians, I leave these words
with you as a deposit, entreating you to keep them secret, and not tell
them to any other than Pausanias, lest you should ruin me. I should not
utter them, were I not extremely concerned for the safety of all Greece;
for I am myself a Greek by origin, and would by no means wish to see
Greece enslaved instead of free. I tell you, then, that the victims have
not been favorable to Mardonius and his army, or else you would have
fought long ago; but now, he has determined to dismiss the victims, and
to come to an engagement at dawn of day; fearing, as I conjecture, that
you may assemble in greater numbers. Therefore be ready. But if
Mardonius should defer the engagement, and not undertake it, persevere
remaining where you are, for in a few days provisions will fail him. And
if this war should terminate according to your wishes, it is right that
you should bear it in mind to effect my freedom, who on behalf of the
Greeks have undertaken so hazardous a task, as to acquaint you with the
intention of Mardonius, in order that the barbarians may not fall upon
you unexpectedly. I am Alexander the Macedonian." Thus having spoken, he
rode back to the camp and his own station.

[Illustration: THE FISHERMAN.]

The generals of the Athenians went to the right wing, and told Pausanias
what they had heard from Alexander; but as the army was deprived of
water and harassed by the cavalry of Mardonius, they remained to
deliberate on these and other matters. They had no longer any
provisions, and their attendants, who had been despatched to the
Peloponnesus to get provisions, were shut out by the cavalry, and unable
to reach the camp.

On consultation the generals of the allies resolved, if the Persians
should defer making the attack on that day, to remove to the island of
Oro, ten stades distant from the Asopus, on which they were then
encamped. This is an island in the midst of the continent. For the
river, dividing higher up, flows down to the plain from Mount Cithron,
having its streams about three stades separate from each other, and
united together below. To this place they determined to remove, that
they might have an abundant supply of water, and the cavalry might not
harass them, as when they were directly opposite. So, in the night, at
the hour agreed upon, they fled from the cavalry toward the city of the
Platans until they arrived at the temple of Juno, which stands before
the city of the Platans, twenty stades distant from the fountain of
Gargaphia. They then encamped round the Herum and stood to their arms
before the sacred precinct.

When Mardonius was informed that the Greeks had withdrawn under cover of
night, and saw the place deserted, he summoned Thorax, of Larissa, and
said: "O son of Aleuas, what will you say now, when you see this ground
deserted? For you, their neighbor, said that the Lacedmonians never
fled from battle, but were the first of men in matters of war; but now
we all see that they have fled away during the past night, in terror of
us, who are truly the most valiant in the world." Then without more ado
he led the Persians at full speed, crossing the Asopus in the track of
the Greeks, as if they had betaken themselves to flight. He directed his
course only against the Lacedmonians and Tegeans; for on account of the
hills he did not espy the Athenians, who had turned into the plain. The
rest of the commanders of the barbarians' brigades, seeing the Persians
advancing to pursue the Greeks, all immediately took up their standards,
and pursued, each as quick as he could, without observing either rank or
order; thus they advanced with a shout and in a throng, as if they were
about to overwhelm the Greeks.

The Persians made a fence with their osier-shields, and let fly their
arrows so incessantly that the Spartans being hard pressed, and the
victims continuing unfavorable, Pausanias looked toward the temple of
Juno of the Platans, and invoked the goddess, praying that they might
not be disappointed of their hopes.

[Illustration: JUNO.]

While he was yet making this invocation, the Tegeans, starting first,
advanced against the barbarians; and immediately after the prayer of
Pausanias, the victims became favorable to the Lacedmonians. Then they
advanced against the Persians, who withstood them, laying aside their
bows. First of all a battle took place about the fence of bucklers; and
when that was thrown down, a long, obstinate fight ensued near the
temple of Ceres, till at last they came to close conflict, when the
barbarians laid hold of the Spartan spears and broke them. Indeed, in
courage and strength, the Persians were not inferior, but were lightly
armed, ignorant of military discipline, and not equal to their
adversaries in skill. They rushed forward upon the Spartans, only to
perish. In that part where Mardonius happened to be, fighting upon a
white horse, at the head of a thousand chosen men, the best of the
Persians, there they pressed their adversaries most vigorously. For as
long as Mardonius survived, they held out, defended themselves, and
overthrew many of the Lacedmonians; but when Mardonius had died, and
the troops stationed round him, which were the strongest, had fallen,
then the rest turned to flight, and gave way to the Lacedmonians. Their
dress, too, was particularly disadvantageous to them, being destitute of
defensive armor. Here satisfaction for the death of Leonidas, according
to the oracle, was paid to the Spartans by Mardonius; and Pausanias
obtained the most signal victory we have ever heard of. Mardonius died
by the hand of Amnestus, a man of distinction at Sparta, who, some time
after the Medic affairs, at the head of three hundred men, engaged at
Stenyclerus with all the Messenians, and he himself perished and his
three hundred. When the Persians at Plata were put to flight by the
Lacedmonians, they fled in disorder to their own camp, and to the
wooden fortification which they had made in the Theban territory. It is
a wonder to me that, when they fought near the grove of Ceres, not one
of the barbarians was seen to enter into the sacred enclosure, or to die
in it, but most fell round the precinct in unconsecrated ground. I am of
opinion, if it is allowable to form an opinion concerning divine things,
that the goddess would not receive them because they had burnt her royal
temple at Eleusis.

When the Persians and the rest of the throng arrived in their flight at
the wooden wall, they mounted the towers before the Lacedmonians came
up, and defended the wall in the best way they could; so that when the
Lacedmonians arrived, a vigorous battle took place before the walls. So
long as the Athenians were absent, the barbarians defended themselves,
and had much the advantage over the Lacedmonians, as they were not
skilled in attacking fortifications; but when the Athenians came, then a
vehement fight at the walls took place, and continued for a long time.
But at length the Athenians, by their valor and pluck, surmounted the
wall, and made a breach; there at length the Greeks poured in. The
Tegeans entered first, and plundered the tent of Mardonius, and among
other things took away the manger for his horse, all of bronze, and well
worth seeing. This manger of Mardonius the Tegeans placed in the temple
of the Alean Minerva; but all the other things they took they carried to
the same place as the rest of the Greeks. The barbarians no longer kept
in close order, nor did any one think of valor; but they were in a state
of consternation, as so many myriads of men were enclosed within so
small a space; and the Greeks had such an easy opportunity of
slaughtering them, that of an army of three hundred thousand men, except
forty thousand with whom Artabazus fled, not three thousand survived. Of
Lacedmonians from Sparta, all that died in the engagement were
ninety-one; of Tegeans, sixteen; and of Athenians, fifty-two.

[Illustration: ELEGANT VASES AND AMPHOR.]

Pausanias made proclamation that no one should touch the booty, and
commanded the helots to bring together all the treasures. Dispersing
themselves through the camp, they found tents decked with gold and
silver, and couches gilt and plated, and golden bowls, and cups, and
other drinking vessels; they also found sacks on the waggons, in which
were discovered gold and silver cauldrons: and from the bodies that lay
dead they stripped bracelets, necklaces, and scimetars of gold; but no
account at all was taken of the variegated apparel. Of this the helots
stole a great deal and sold it to the ginet, so that the great wealth
of the ginet here had its beginning, for they purchased gold from the
helots as if it had been bronze. They collected the treasures together,
and took from them a tithe for the god at Delphi, from which the golden
tripod was dedicated, which stands on the three-headed bronze serpent,
close to the altar; they also took a tithe for the god at Olympia, from
which they dedicated the bronze Jupiter, ten cubits high; and a tithe to
the god at the Isthmus, from which was made the bronze Neptune, seven
cubits high. They divided the rest, and each took the share he was
entitled to, of the gold, silver, and other treasures, and beasts of
burden. Now what choice treasures were given those others who most
distinguished themselves at Plata, is mentioned by no one. But for
Pausanias, ten of every thing was selected and given himslaves, horses,
talents, camels, and all other treasures in like manner. It is said also
that when Xerxes fled from Greece, he left all his own equipage to
Mardonius; Pausanias, therefore, seeing Mardonius' equipage furnished
with gold, silver, and various-colored hangings, ordered the bakers and
cooks to prepare a supper in the same manner as for Mardonius: and,
astonished at the profusion set before him of gold and silver couches
handsomely carved, and gold and silver tables, and magnificent
preparations for the supper, he in derision ordered his own attendants
to prepare a Laconian supper by the side of it, and when the repast was
spread, the difference was so ridiculous that he laughed, and sent for
the generals of the Greeks and said: "Men of Greece, I have called you
together to show you the folly of the leader of the Medes, who left such
sumptuous fare as this, to come to us, who have such poor fare, to take
it from us." A considerable time after these events, many of the
Platans found chests of gold and silver, and other precious things. And
still later was discovered a skull without any seam, consisting of one
bone, and an upper jaw which had teeth growing in a piece, all in one
bone, both the front teeth and the grinders; and there was likewise
discovered the skeleton of a man five cubits high.

When the Greeks had buried their dead in Plata, they immediately
determined, on consultation, to march against Thebes, and to demand the
surrender of those who had sided with the Medes, amongst the first of
them Timegenides and Attaginus, who were the chief leaders; and, if they
should not give them up, they resolved not to depart from the city
before they had taken it. On the eleventh day after the engagement, they
arrived and besieged the Thebans, requiring them to give up the men;
and, receiving "No" for an answer, they ravaged the country, and
attacked the walls. As they did not cease damaging them, on the
twentieth day Timegenides spoke thus to the Thebans: "Men of Thebes,
since the Greeks have so resolved that they will not give over besieging
us until either they have taken Thebes, or you have delivered us up to
them, let not the Botian territory suffer any more on our account. But
if, being desirous of money, they demand us as a pretence, let us give
them money from the public treasury; for we sided with the Mede by
general consent, and not of ourselves alone. If, however, they carry on
the siege really because they want us, we will present ourselves before
them to plead our cause." He appeared to speak well and to the purpose;
and the Thebans immediately sent a herald to Pausanias, expressing their
willingness to surrender the men. When they had agreed on these terms,
Attaginus escaped from the city, and his sons, who were brought before
him, Pausanias acquitted from the charge, saying that boys could have no
part in the guilt of siding with the Mede. As to the others whom the
Thebans delivered up, they thought that they should be admitted to plead
their cause, and moreover trusted to repel the charge by bribery; but
he, as soon as he had them in his power, suspecting this very thing,
dismissed the whole army of the allies, and, conducting the men to
Corinth, put them to death.




CHAPTER II.

THE BATTLE OF MYCALE.


On the same day on which the defeat at Plata occurred, another happened
to take place at Mycale in Ionia. For while the Greeks were stationed at
Delos, there came to them as ambassadors from Samos, Lampon,
Athenagoras, and Hegesistratus, being sent by the Samians, unknown to
the Persians. When they came to the generals, Hegesistratus urged that
"if only the Ionians should see them, they would revolt from the
Persians, and that the barbarians would not withstand them; or, if they
should withstand them, the Greeks would not find any other such booty."
Invoking, too, their common gods, he besought them to deliver Grecian
men from servitude, and to repel the barbarian; and he said, "that this
would be easy for them to do, for their ships sailed badly, and were not
fit to fight with them; and, if they suspected at all that they were
leading them on deceitfully, they were themselves ready to go on board
their ships as hostages." The Samian stranger was so earnest in his
entreaties, that Leotychides asked: "O Samian friend, what is your
name?" "Hegesistratus," he answered; upon which, interrupting the
rest of his discourse, Leotychides exclaimed: "I accept the
"Hegesistratus,"[30] my Samian friend; only do you take care that before
you sail away both you yourself and those who are with you, pledge your
faith that the Samians will be zealous allies to us." The Samians
immediately pledged their faith and made oath of confederacy with the
Greeks. The others sailed home, but he ordered Hegesistratus to sail
with the fleet, regarding his name as an omen. The Greeks tarried that
day, and on the next sacrificed auspiciously, Deiphonus, son of Evenius,
of Apollonia in the Ionian gulf, acting as diviner.

The following incident befel his father, Evenius. There are in this
Apollonia sheep sacred to the sun, which by day feed near the river that
flows from Mount Lacmon through the Apollonian territory into the sea,
near the port of Oricus; but by night, chosen men, the most eminent of
the citizens for wealth and birth, keep watch over them, each for a
year: for the Apollonians set a high value upon these sheep, in
consequence of some oracle. They are folded in a cavern at a distance
from the city. There, once on a time, Evenius, being chosen, kept watch,
and one night when he had fallen asleep during his watch, wolves entered
the cave, and destroyed about sixty of the sheep. When he discovered
what had happened, he mentioned it to no one, purposing to buy others,
and put them in their place. This occurrence, however, did not escape
the notice of the Apollonians; and as soon as they discovered it, they
brought him to trial, and gave sentence that, for having fallen asleep
during his watch, he should be deprived of sight. But after they had
blinded Evenius, from that time forward neither did their sheep
multiply, nor did the land yield its usual fruit. An admonition was
given them at Dodona and Delphi, when they inquired of the prophets the
cause of the present calamities "that they had unjustly deprived
Evenius, the keeper of the sacred sheep, of his sight; for they
themselves had sent the wolves, and would not cease avenging him, until
the people should give such satisfaction for what they had done, as he
himself should choose, and think sufficient: then, the gods themselves
would give such a present to Evenius, that most men would pronounce him
happy, from possessing it." The Apollonians, keeping this answer secret,
deputed some of their citizens to negociate the matter with Evenius. One
day when he was seated on a bench, they went and sat down by him, and
conversed on different subjects, till at length they began to
commiserate his misfortune, and leading him artfully on, they asked,
"what reparation he would choose, if the Apollonians were willing to
give him satisfaction for what they had done." Not having heard of the
oracle he made this choice, "if any one would give him the lands of
certain citizens," naming those who he knew had the two best estates in
Apollonia, "and besides these a house," which he knew was the handsomest
in the city, he said, "he would thenceforth forego his anger, and this
reparation would content him." Immediately taking him up they said, "the
Apollonians make you this reparation for the loss of your eyes, in
obedience to an oracle they have received." He thereupon was very
indignant, on hearing the whole truth, for he had been deceived; but the
Apollonians bought the property from the owners, and gave him what he
had chosen, and immediately the gift of divination was implanted in him,
so that he became very celebrated.

Deiphonus, the son of this Evenius, was brought by the Corinthians to
officiate as diviner to the army.

The Greeks at length determined to sail to the continent: having
therefore prepared boarding-ladders, and all other things that were
necessary for a sea-fight, they sailed to Mycale. No one was seen near
the camp, ready to meet them, but they beheld the ships drawn up within
the fortification, and a numerous land-force disposed along the beach,
thereupon Leotychides, advancing first in a ship, and nearing the beach
as closely as possible, made proclamation by a herald to the Ionians,
saying: "Men of Ionia, as many of you as hear me, attend to what I say;
for the Persians will understand nothing of the advice I give you. When
we engage, it behooves every one first of all to remember Liberty; and
next the watch-word, Hebe; and let him who does not hear this, learn it
from those who do hear." The meaning of this proceeding was the same as
that of Themistocles at Artemisium; for either these words, being
concealed from the barbarians, would induce the Ionians to revolt, or,
if they should be reported to the barbarians, would make them
distrustful of the Greeks. Then the Greeks put their ships to shore,
landed on the beach, and drew up in order of battle. But when the
Persians saw them preparing for action, and knew that they had
admonished the Ionians, they suspected that the Samians favored the
Greeks, and took away their arms.

Then the Greeks advanced toward the barbarians; and a rumor flew through
the whole army that a herald's staff was seen lying on the beach and
that the Greeks had fought and conquered the army of Mardonius in
Botia. Thus the interposition of heaven is manifest by many plain
signs; since on this same day on which the defeat at Plata took place,
and when that at Mycale was just about to happen, a rumor reached the
Greeks in this latter place; so that the army was inspired with much
greater courage, and was more eager to meet danger.

The Athenians, and those who were drawn up next to them, forming about
half the army, had to advance along the shore over level ground; but the
Lacedmonians and their associates, along a ravine and some hills. So
that whilst the Lacedmonians were making a circuit, those in the other
wing were already engaged. Now, so long as the bucklers of the Persians
remained standing, they defended themselves strenuously, and had not the
worst of the battle; but when the Athenians and their comrades mutually
encouraged one another, in order that the victory might belong to them,
and not to the Lacedmonians, they flew with such vigor into the battle,
that the face of affairs was immediately changed. They broke through the
bucklers and fell in a body upon the Persians. They sustained the attack
and defended themselves for a time but at last fled to the
fortification. The Athenians, Corinthians, Sicyonians, and Trzenians,
drawn up in order together, following close upon them, rushed into the
fortification at the same time. When the fortification was taken, the
barbarians no longer thought of resisting, but all except the Persians
betook themselves to flight; they, in small detachments, fought with the
Greeks who were continually rushing within the fortification. And of the
Persian generals, two made their escape, and two died. Artayntes and
Ithramitres, commanders of the naval forces escaped; but Mardontes, and
Tigranes, generals of the land army, died fighting. While the Persians
were still fighting, the Lacedmonians came up, and assisted in
accomplishing the rest. Of the Greeks themselves many fell on this
occasion, especially the Sicyonians, and their general Perilaus. The
Samians, who were in the camp of the Medes and had been deprived of
their arms, as soon as they saw the battle turning, did all they could,
wishing to help the Greeks; and the rest of the Ionians, as the Samians
led the way, fled from the Persians and attacked the barbarians. The
Milesians had been appointed to guard the passes for the Persians so
that in the event of failure they might have guides to conduct them to
the heights of Mycale. They, however, did every thing contrary to what
was ordered; guiding them in their flight by other ways which led to the
enemy, and at last themselves assisted in slaying them. Thus Ionia
revolted a second time from the Persians. In this battle of the Greeks,
the Athenians most distinguished themselves. When they had killed most
of the barbarians, some fighting and others flying, they brought out all
the booty on the beach, including several chests of money, and burnt the
ships and the whole fortification. Then they took into their alliance
the Samians, Chians, Lesbians, and other islanders, who were then
serving with the Greeks, bound them by pledges and oaths that they would
remain firm and not revolt; then sailed to the Hellespont, and home.

[Illustration: BAS-RELIEF OF THE MUSES.]




SYNCHRONISTICAL TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL EVENTS IN HERODOTUS.


GREEKS.

 ------------------------------------------------
                   _Peloponnesus._

 ------------------------------------------------
                                             B.C.
 Rape of Io from Argos                       1687
 Pelops conq. the Pelopon                    1362
 Eurystheus conquered                        1311
 Rape of Helen                               1290
 Aristodemus conq. the Pelo.                 1190

       _Lacedmon._         |    _Corinth._
                            |
 Procles and Eurysthenes    |  Oligarchy of
   kings               1178 |    Bacchiad.
 Theras col. Callista       |  Cypselus born  700
   (Thera)             1150 |
 Lycurgus               884 |  Seizes the
 Battus migrates            |    trannny      663
   from Cal. and            |  Periander      633
   founds Cyrene        632 |  Banishes
 First war with             |    Lycophron    575
 Tegea                  620 | Sends 300
 Ariston and                |   Corcyran
   Anaxandrides,            |   boys to
   kings of Lacedmon   574 |   Alyattes      565
 Ally with Crsus    554    | Dies            563
                            | Miltiades, son
 Tegea taken            546 |   of Cypselus,
 War with Argives           |   founds
   about Thyrea         545 |   Chersonesus   560
 Send troops ag't.          |
   Polycrates           525 |
 Demaratus              520 | Stesagoras
 Cleomenes              515 |   succeeds      531
 Dorieus migrates           |
   to Libya             515 | Miltiades, son of
 Cleo. violates the         |   Cimon, succeeds
   Argive grove         514 |                 515
 Cleomenes expels           |
   Clisthenes               |
   from Athens          508 | Takes Lemnos    510
 Invades Attica         507 |
 Demaratus exiled       492 | Retires before the
                            |   Scythians     507
 Leotychides king       492 |
 Cleomenes kills            | Escapes from the
   himself              490 |   Persians to
 Leonidas slain at          |   Imbros        497
   Thermopyl           480 |
 Pausanias wins             |
   at Plata            479 | At the battle
 Leotychides at             |   of Salamis    480
   Mycale               479 |

 ---------------------------+-------------------------
     _Attica, Botia,       |    _Greeks in Asia
    Phocis, tolia, etc._   |    and the Islands._
 ---------------------------+-------------------------
                       B.C. |                     B.C.
 Deucalion             1570 | Ion goes to Asia    1391
 Cecrops               1550 |
 Erectheus             1510 | olian migrations
 Ion, son of Xuthus    1427 |   under Orestes,
 Rape of Medea by the       |   Penthilus, and
   Argonauts           1349 |   Echelatus    1210-1174
 Theseus defeated           |
   Eurystheus          1311 | Ionian migrations
 Decaleans give up          |   (driven from the
   Helen to the Tyndarid   |   Pelop. by the
                       1296 |   Achans)          1130
 Pelasgians expelled        |
   from Attica, conquer     | Dorian migration
   Lemnos              1162 | Samians reach
 Codrus                1153 |   Tartessus          640
 Rape of Ath. women         | Thrasybulus          625
   from Brauron        1152 | Conquered by
 Alcmon, the last          |   Crsus
   Archon               683 | Conquered by
 Conspiracy of Ceylon   612 |   Harpagus           542
 Legislation of Solon   594 | Phocans defeat
 Megacles mar. Clisthenes'  |   Carthaginians,
   daughter             570 |   etc.
 Pisistratus, tyrant    561 | Found Hyela          535
 Expelled               559 | Polycrates tyrant
 Re-established         555 |   at Samos       532-523
 Re-expelled            553 |
 Regains it             542 | Samians found
 Dies                   528 |   Cydonia            524
 Hipparchus succeeds    528 | Syloson obtains
 Assassina. of Cimon    527 |   Samos              512
 Hipparchus assassinated    | Ionians commence
                        514 |   disturbances       504
 Hippias succeeds       514 |
 Expelled               510 | Burn Sardis          503
 Factions of Clisthenes     | Joined by the
   and Isagoras         509 |   Cyprians           502
 Clisthenes expelled    508 | Miletus taken        498
 Inv. of Cleomenes      507 | Aristagoras slain    498
 Athenians defeat the       |
   Botians, invade         | Samians take Zancle  497
   Euba, and conquer       | Chios, Tenedos,
   the Chalcidians      506 |   etc., taken by
 Miltiades gains the        |   the Persians       497
   battle of Marathon   490 | Phocians defeat
 Dies                   489 |   Thessalians        482
 Xerxes takes Athens    480 |
 Battle of Salamis      480 | Ionians join the
 Mardonius retakes          |   allies at Mycale   479
   Athens               479 |


BARBARIANs

 -------------------+---------------------+-------------------
                    |                     |    _Scythians
   _Phnicians._    |    _Egyptians._     |       and
                    |                     |   Cimmerians._
 -------------------+---------------------+-------------------
                    |                     |
     Migrated       |      God-kings,     |    Cimmerians
     from the       |        17570        |      invade
     Erythran      |          to         |      Asia,
        to          |        15570.       |       but
    Phoenicia,      |                     |     expelled
       about        |        Menes        |      by the
       2267.        |          to         |    Scythians
                    |       Mris,        |      about
    Colonized       |         2235        |       624.
      Thasos,       |          to         |
       1550.        |         1416.       |    Scythians
                    |                     |       rule
      Founded       |       Sesostris     |      Upper
     Carthage,      |          to         |      Asia,
         819.       |        Sethon,      |       624
                    |         1416        |        to
   Circumnavigate   |          to         |       596.
       Libya,       |         671.        |
         609.       |                     |     Invaded
                    |     Twelve kings    |        by
                    |          to         |     Darius,
                    |        Amasis       |       508.
                    |         671         |
                    |          to         |      Invade
                    |         525.        |       the
                    |                     |   Chersonesus;
                    |                     |    Miltiades
                    |                     |     retires,
                    |                     |       507.

 -----------------------------------------+-----------------
                                          |
        _Assyrians and Babylonians._      |   _Lydians._
                                          |
 -----------------------------------------+-----------------
                                   B.C.   |
  Empire                         1221-711 |    Atyad to
  Semiramis                       747-733 |      1221.
  Medic revolt                        711 |    Heraclid
                                          |    1221-716.
     _Babylonia._   |    _Media, etc._    |   Gyges, 716.
                    |                     |   Ardys, 678.
      Nitocris,     |   Deioces, 700.     |   Cimmerians
      604-561.      |  Div. the Medes.    |   take Sardis,
      Turns the     |  Phraortes, 647.    |       634.
      Euphrates     |  Invades Assyria    |   Sadyattes,
    and improves    |  Perished before    |       629.
       Babylon.     |      Nineveh.       |  Milesian war,
                    |   Cyaxares, 625.    |     622-610.
      Labynetus     |   Conq. Assyria.    |  Alyattes, 617.
    (Belshazzar),   |      Besieges       |    Drove out
     son of         |   Nineveh, 603.     |   Cimmerians,
      Nitocris,     | Scythian invasion,  |       613.
      succeeds.     |      624-596.       |     War with
     Arbitrates     |   Astyages, 585.    |  Cyaxares, 602.
       between      |     CYRUS born,     | Crsus, 560.
      Cyaxares      |        571.         |
         and        |   King in sport,    |    Conquers
      Alyattes.     |        561.         |     Greeks.
                    |                     |
                    |                     |   Visited by
                    |                     |     Solon.
                    |   _Persian Empire_  |

CYRUS, king 550.

Attacked by Crsus. Conquers Lydia, and takes Sardis. Mazares punishes
Lydian rebels. Harpagus takes Phoca, conquers Ionia and olis.

Babylon taken by Cyrus, 536.

Massagetan expedition. Cyrus slain, 530.

CAMBYSES, 530-523. Conquers Egypt, 525. Unsuccessful expedition against
the Ethiopians and Ammonians. Wounds Apis. Goes mad. Slays his brother
Smerdis. Marries and kills his sister. Magian revolt. Dies, 523.

SMERDIS MAGUS, 523. Conspiracy of the Seven. Death of the Magi.

DARIUS, 522-485. Sends Democydes to spy Greece. Babylonian revolt.
Babylon taken by Zopyrus, 516. Restores Syloson to Samos, 512. Barca
conquered, 512. Invades Scythia, 508. Megabazus subdues Thrace. Otanes
subdues Lemnos and Imbros. Disturbances in Ionia. Burning of Sardis,
503. Cyprians join the revolt, 502; conquered, 501. Miletus taken, 498.
Pacification of Ionia, 497. Mardonius marches against Greece, 495.
Wrecked at Athos. Darius sends to Greece for earth and water, 493.
Expedition of Datis and Artaphernes, 492; enslave Naxos and Eretria,
490. Marathon, 490. Preparations for another invasion, 489. Egyptian
revolt, 486.

XERXES, 485-479. Subdues Egypt, 484. Prepares for a Greek expedition.
Leaves Susa, April, 481. Winters at Sardis. Battle of Thermopyl, 480.
Takes Athens, 480. Battle of Salamis, Sept., 480. Retires to Asia.
Mardonius defeated at Plata, and the Persian fleet at Mycale, the same
day, Sept. 22, 479.




 HERODOTEAN WEIGHTS AND MONEY, DRY AND LIQUID MEASURES,
 AND MEASUREMENTS OF LENGTH.


_Eubic or Attic Silver Weights and Money._

                                WEIGHT (Avoirdupois).    VALUE.
                                  lbs.   oz.   grs.
   1 Obol                                    11.08     $.033
   6 Obols         1 Drachma                 66.5       .198
 100 Drachm       1 Mina               15    33.75    19.784
  60 Min          1 Talent        56    15  100.32  1187.00

_ginetan Silver Weights and Money._

                                  lbs.   oz.   grs.
   1 Obol                                    16        $.04
   6 Obols         1 Drachma                 96       27.00
 100 Drachm       1 Mina           1     5   78.96       
  60 Min          1 Talent        82     3   30.46  1620.00

The gold Stater of Crsus and the gold Daric are each supposed to be
worth about 20 Attic silver drachm, or about $4.00 in our money.

Herodotus makes the Babylonian Talent equal to 70 Eubic Min, but
Hussey calculates its weight at 71_lbs._ 1_oz._ 69.45_grs._ If,
however, these are reckoned by comparison with our gold money, they are
worth much more.


_Attic Dry Measures._

                                      Gallons.  Quarts.
  1 Chnix                                       1
 48 Chnices        1 Medimnus         12         
  1 Medimnus and }
  3 Chnices     }  1 Persian Artaba   12         3

_Liquid Measures._

                                      Gallons.   Pints.
  1 Chnix                                       1
 48 Chnices        1 Amphora           9         

Hesychius considers the Aryster to be the same as the Cotyla, which
Hussey calculates to hold half a pint.

_Measures of Length._

                                               Miles. Yards. Feet. Inches.
   1 Digit (finger's breadth)                                     .7584
   4 Digits               1 Palm (hand-breadth)                  3.0336
   3 Palms                1 Span                                 9.1008
   4 Palms                1 Foot                             1    0.135
   2 Spans or 6 Palms     1 Cubit                            1    6.2016
   1 Cubit and 6 Digits   1 Royal Cubit                      1    8.4768
   4 Cubits               1 Fathom (Orgya)                   6    0.81
 100 Feet or 16 Orgy    1 Plethrum                  33      2    1.5
   6 Plethra              1 Stadium                  202      0    9
  30 Stadia               1 Persian Parasan      3    787      1    6
   2 Parasangs            1 Schnus              6   494      3    0

The Egyptian Cubit contained nearly 17 inches.

The Arura contained 21,904 square English feet, or a fraction over half
an acre.

[30] Hegesistratus means "leader of an army."




UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME.


PLUTARCH FOR BOYS AND GIRLS. Selected and edited by Prof. John S. White.
Quarto, with many illustrations $3 00.

This edition contains all the "Lives" and "Parallels" in Plutarch's own
words, with such omissions only as were necessary to adapt them for
young readers. There is also an Introduction and Life of Plutarch by the
editor. As a standard work, adapted to both boys and girls, its wealth
of anecdote and faithful portrayal of character render it peculiarly
valuable.

"Precious ore and no dross."_Home Journal._

"It is a pleasure to see in so beautiful and elegant a form, one
of the great books of the world. The best Plutarch for young
readers."_Literary World._

"Shows admirable scholarship and judgment."_The Critic._

 G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS,
 NEW YORK AND LONDON.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Boys' and Girls' Herodotus, by John S. White

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOYS' AND GIRLS' HERODOTUS ***

***** This file should be named 55758-0.txt or 55758-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/7/5/55758/

Produced by Turgut Dincer, Chris Pinfield and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

	CHAPTER ONE

	The Storm

	At half past six on a Friday evening in January, Lincoln International Airport was open, but it was having serious problems.

	The airport, together with the whole of the Midwestern United States, had been hit by the worst storm in years. It had already lasted for three days. Now troubles, like spots on a sick, weakened body, were beginning to break out everywhere.

	A truck carrying 200 dinners was lost in the snow somewhere on an airport service road, and so far the search for it had been unsuccessful.

	At least a hundred flights were delayed, some by many hours.

	Out on the airfield, runway three zero was out of use. It was blocked by an Aereo-Mexican plane which lay sideways across it. The front wheels were stuck in the deep mud which lay under the snow near the edge of the runway. Aereo-Mexican had tried hard for two hours to move it, but without any success. Now they were asking TWA to help them.

	The loss of runway three zero made the work of Air Traffic Control even more difficult than usual. With 20 planes waiting to land, they were delaying take-offs. The airfield seemed to be full of waiting planes. Inside the main passenger terminal, too, there were crowds of impatient people waiting beside their piles of luggage. Even the large notice on the roof of the terminal - LINCOLN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - was hidden by the snow.

	Mel Bakersfeld was surprised that the airport was still open. Mel was the Airport General Manager. He was a tall, powerful man. At the moment, he was standing by the Snow Control Desk, high in the control tower. Usually you could see the whole airport from here. Only Air Traffic Control had a better view.

	Tonight you could see only a few lights. This was an unusually hard winter. The storm had started five days ago in the Colorado Mountains, and then swept across a large part of the United States. It brought strong winds, freezing cold and heavy snow.

	Maintenance men with snowploughs were clearing the snow as it fell, but by now many of them were terribly tired. The storm seemed to be winning.

	Danny Farrow was at the Snow Control Desk, talking to the Maintenance Snow Centre by radio phone.

	'We're losing ground. I need six more snowploughs out there.'

	'Oh sure, sure,' an angry voice replied. 'Six more snowploughs! And where do you think they're going to come from? Any more stupid ideas?'

	'We sent four ploughs out to find that truck,' Danny said. 'If they haven't found it yet, they'll just have to try harder.'

	An explosion of anger came over the radio phone in reply.

	Mel knew how easily tempers were lost under these conditions. These men were highly trained, and they were working as hard as they could.

	The maintenance man's voice came on the phone again.

	'We're worried about that truck too, Danny. The driver could freeze to death. He won't die of hunger, though, if he has any sense!'

	'This search will block the service roads,' Danny told Mel. 'You'll get plenty of complaints about that.'

	'I know,' Mel said. Airport managers were used to complaints. The most important thing was to save the life of the driver. For a moment, he wished that he could sit down and help Danny. Mel needed action. The cold weather was making his bad foot - an old war wound from Korea - ache. Then he realized that Danny could work better on his own.

	He telephoned Air Traffic Control.

	'Any progress on the Aereo-Mexican plane?'

	'Not yet, Mr Bakersfeld.'

	'Is the runway still blocked?'

	'Yes.'

	This airport needs more runways, Mel thought. This proves it. The trouble was, there were plenty of people who disagreed with him, and they were more powerful than he was.

	'And another thing,' he was told. 'As runway three zero is blocked, planes are taking off over Meadowood. The complaints have started coming in already.'

	'Oh no!' Mel said. He was tired of hearing complaints from the people who lived in Meadowood. The airport had been built long before their houses, but they never seemed to stop complaining about the noise. As a result, the runway nearest to Meadowood was used only under special conditions. On the occasions when it had to be used, pilots were told to reduce the noise made by the engines on take-off. It was possible to do this, but most pilots considered it to be foolish and dangerous and hated being told to do it. In any case, it had not stopped the complaints from Meadowood.

	'How many complaints have there been?' Mel asked.

	'At least 50.'

	'Don't they know there's a storm and we have a runway out of use?'

	'We try to tell them, but they don't want to listen. I hear they're holding a meeting tonight to decide what to do next.'

	More trouble, Mel thought.

	He asked: 'Is my brother on duty tonight?'

	'Yes.'

	Mel's brother, Keith, worked in Air Traffic Control.

	'Is he all right? Does he seem nervous?'

	The other man paused before he replied. 'Yes, he does. More than usual. I wish I could tell him to rest, but we're short of men already'

	'I know, I know.' Recently Mel had been very worried about Keith.

	He put the phone down, and thought again about a note he had received 15 minutes before. It was from Tanya Livingston. She worked for Trans America as the Passenger Relations Agent, and was a special friend of Mel's.

	The note warned him that the Airlines Snow Committee, led by Captain Vernon Demerest, was going to blame Mel for the many flight delays. They were going to attack him for what they believed was bad management.

	Captain Vernon Demerest was one of Trans America's most experienced pilots. He was married to Mel's sister, Sarah. The Bakersfelds were a real "aviation family", but even with this family connection Mel and Vernon were not friendly with one another. Recently they had exchanged angry words at an important meeting, and Mel felt that the critical report was a direct result of this.

	He was not really worried, because he knew that he was doing everything he could to run the airport well. It was unpleasant to be criticized, but his conscience was clear.

	Tanya ended her note by inviting him to have a cup of coffee with her, when he had time. Mel decided he had time now. He always enjoyed talking to Tanya.



	CHAPTER TWO

	Mel Bakersfeld

	Mel went down from the control tower to his office. The office was silent and empty. He took a heavy coat and boots out of a cupboard near his big desk.

	He was not really on duty at the airport tonight, but because of the storm he had stayed on to help. Otherwise he would have been at home with Cindy and the children.

	Or would he?

	It's hard to know the truth about yourself, he thought. If there had been no storm he would probably have found some other excuse for not going home. He didn't seem to go home immediately after work very often these days. Of course, the airport kept him very busy, but - to be honest - it also offered an escape from his endless quarrels with Cindy.

	Oh God! He had just noticed a note that his secretary had left on his desk, reminding him that he had promised to go to a party with Cindy that evening. Cindy hated to miss a party if she knew that any important people were going to be there.

	He still had two hours. He could finish what he had to do here in time to get to the party - but he would be late.

	He phoned his home number.

	Roberta, his older daughter, answered.

	'Hi,' he said,' this is your Dad.'

	'Yes, I know,' she said coldly.

	'How was school today?'

	'We had more than one class, Father. Which one are you asking me about?'

	Mel sighed. There were days when he felt that his home life had become unbearable. Did all thirteen-year-old girls talk to their fathers like this? He loved both his daughters very much. There were times when he thought that his marriage had only lasted as long as it had because of them. It hurt him to hear Roberta speak so coldly. But who was to blame for her behaviour? Perhaps she had seen her parents quarrelling too often.

	'Is your mother at home?' he asked.

	'She went out. She hopes you'll try not to be late for the party for once.'

	She was clearly repeating Cindy's words.

	'If your mother calls, tell her I'll be a little late,' Mel said. There was no answer, so he asked: 'Did you hear me?'

	'Yes,' Roberta said. 'Have you finished? I have homework to do.'

	'No,' Mel told her, 'I haven't finished. Don't talk to me like that, Roberta. I won't allow it.'

	'Of course, Father.'

	'And don't call me Father! '

	'Yes, Father.'

	Mel almost laughed, but instead he asked: 'Is everything all right at home?'

	'Yes. Libby wants to talk to you.'

	'In a minute. I have something else to tell you first. Because of the storm, I'll probably sleep at the airport tonight.'

	Again there was no answer. Then Roberta said: 'Will you speak to Libby now?'

	'Yes, please. Good night, Robbie.'

	'Good night.'

	The telephone changed hands, and he heard a small childish voice say: 'Daddy, Daddy! Guess what happened today!' Libby always sounded so excited with life.

	'Let me think,' Mel said. 'I know. You had fun in the snow today'

	'Yes, I did. But it wasn't that.'

	'Then you'll have to tell me.'

	'Well, for homework we have to write down all the good things that we think will happen next month.'

	She was so happy and trouble-free. Mel wondered how long she would remain like this.

	'That's nice,' he said, 'I like that.'

	'Daddy, Daddy! Will you help me?'

	'If I can.'

	'I want a map of February.'

	He understood what she meant, and told her to look at the calendar on his desk. He needed a map of February himself, he thought.

	He heard her small feet running from the room. Someone else put the telephone down without speaking.

	Mel walked out of his office carrying his coat. From here he could look down over the crowded hall of the main terminal building. He could not see a single empty seat. Every information desk was surrounded by a crowd of impatient or worried people.

	The ticket agents were working under severe pressure. As he watched, one of them was speaking calmly to a young man who had lost his temper and was shouting at her. Looking down at another desk, he saw an agent quietly finding a seat on a plane for an important businessman.

	Nobody looked up and saw Mel. Most passengers never gave a thought to the large number of people necessary to keep an airport running. Of course, if people knew more about the airport, they would also know more about its dangers and weaknesses. Perhaps it was better for them not to know about these things.

	He walked towards Tanya's office.

	'Evening, Mr Bakersfeld,' someone said. 'Are you looking for Mrs Livingston?'

	'Yes, I am.'

	So people were putting their names together already! Mel wondered what they were saying about his friendship with Tanya.

	'She's in her office, Mr Bakersfeld. We had a little problem. She's taking care of it now.'



	CHAPTER THREE

	Tanya Livingston

	In Tanya's office a young girl in the uniform of a Trans America ticket agent was crying noisily.

	Tanya made her sit down, and told her: 'Make yourself comfortable. We can talk later.'

	For a while there was no sound in the room except the girl's crying.

	Patsy Smith was about twenty. Tanya was nearer forty. Looking at the girl, she felt that the difference in their ages was even greater than that. Perhaps it was because she had been married and Patsy had not.

	It was the second time that Tanya had thought about her age today. This morning she had noticed grey hairs among the red. It reminded her that she was getting older, and that by now she should know what she was doing with her life. Her own daughter was growing up.

	Patsy Smith began to speak, finding the words with difficulty. Her eyes were red from crying.

	'Why are some passengers so rude? I was doing my best. We all were.'

	'Tell me what happened,' Tanya said.

	It was a familiar story. A man had missed his flight, and it had been difficult to find him a place on another. When Patsy at last succeeded in finding him a place, he complained that he didn't want to see the film that was going to be shown on that flight, and told her that she was slow and didn't know how to do her job properly. In the end she had been unable to bear his insults any more, and she had thrown a book at him.

	'Well, I hope it hit him hard,' Tanya said. 'I know how rude some people can be. Now I'm going to send you home to have a good rest.'

	The girl looked up in surprise.

	'Oh, I understand,' Tanya told her, 'but this mustn't happen again, Patsy, or you'll be in trouble.'

	Patsy smiled weakly. 'It won't happen again, I promise.'

	'Let me tell you something,' Tanya said. 'After you left, another man came and told me that he had seen what happened. He said you weren't to blame. He told me that he had a daughter the same age as you, and that he would hit anyone who spoke to her like that man spoke to you. So you see, there are some nice people in the world, after all.'

	Dealing with the public could be terribly difficult, Tanya knew. It was hard to be polite when so many people were rude to you.

	As Patsy was leaving the office, Mel came in.

	'Have a good night's rest, and we'll expect you back tomorrow,' called out Tanya.

	'I'm tired too,' Mel said. 'Will you send me home to rest?'

	Tanya looked hard at him and he noticed her clear blue eyes and short red hair. She looked good in her blue uniform.

	'Will you let me send you to my apartment to rest?' she asked. 'I'll cook you a good dinner.'

	'I wish I could say yes, but I can't. Can I buy you a cup of coffee?'

	'All right,' Tanya said, 'but I must be quick. I'm on duty for another two hours.'

	As they walked towards the coffee shop, Mel said: 'Can I come to dinner some other night, Tanya? I'd like to.'

	Her sudden invitation had surprised him. She had never asked him to visit her apartment before. He wondered if this could be leading to a love affair, and knew that that would be a serious matter for both of them.

	'Come to dinner on Sunday,' she said.

	'Thank you. I will.' Could he leave his family on a Sunday? Well, Cindy often did.

	They had never seen the coffee shop so full of people before.

	As they went to sit down, Mel almost fell, and seized Tanya's arm. I suppose people will talk about that, she thought.

	'What crowds!' she remarked.

	'We'll be seeing bigger and bigger crowds in the future,' Mel told her. 'We should be building bigger airports, but we're not. Some people just refuse to understand what is needed.'

	He liked talking about airports and airlines to Tanya, because he knew that she was interested.

	'We'll see some changes soon,' he said. 'Carrying goods by air is going to become more important than carrying passengers.'

	'Oh dear,' said Tanya. 'Perhaps I'm old-fashioned, but I prefer to work with passengers.'

	Mel continued to talk until a waiter came to take their order.

	'Sorry, Tanya,' he said, 'I was beginning to make a speech.'

	'You ought to make more speeches.'

	They had first become friendly after he had made a speech to the Airport Operators' Council. Tanya had thought it a wonderful speech, and had told him so. But recently he had not been speaking in public so much.

	'How did you know about the Snow Committee report?' he asked her.

	'It was typed in the Trans America Office,' Tanya replied. 'I saw it there. Tell me, why does Captain Demerest dislike you so much?'

	'I suppose he knows I dislike him.'

	'If you want to, you can tell him that now.'

	Mel turned and saw a tall, good-looking man. He was not in uniform, but he had a commanding manner. He saw Mel and Tanya, but he did not smile or speak to them.

	'He's taking Flight Two to Rome tonight,' Tanya said.

	Only the most experienced pilots flew Flight Two, which was called the Golden Argosy. Everyone knew that Vernon Demerest was a fine pilot, but few people liked him.

	Mel was just thinking how attractive Tanya looked in her uniform, when she said: 'I may be out of uniform soon. I'm looking for a better post.'

	'I'm sure you'll be successful,' Mel told her. 'You could get to the top in aviation if you wanted to.'

	'I'm not sure if I want to,' she said slowly.

	'Would you prefer to get married again?'

	'How could I? Who wants a divorced woman with a child?'

	Tanya's marriage had been a terrible failure. Her husband had left her before her daughter had been born.

	Before they left the coffee shop, Mel phoned the Snow Desk. Danny told him that the Aereo-Mexican plane was still stuck across the runway. Aereo-Mexican had asked TWA for help, and TWA had sent for Joe Patroni. He was driving to the airport from his home now.

	'I'm glad they sent for Patroni,' Mel said. 'If he can't move the plane, nobody can.'

	There was more news. The lost truck had been found and the driver was alive and going to be all right.

	'Good,' said Mel. 'I'm going out on the airfield myself in a minute.'

	'Be careful,' Danny told him. 'I hear it's a bit cold out there.'

	As they left the coffee shop, someone came with a message for Tanya. A stowaway had been found on a flight from Los Angeles.

	'Is that all?' she said. 'That often happens.'

	'Yes, but this is a very unusual kind of stowaway.'

	'That might be interesting,' Mel said, 'It will give me an excuse to come and see you again later.'

	Tanya touched his hand. 'Do you need an excuse?' she asked.



	CHAPTER FOUR

	Joe Patroni

	Joe Patroni, as Mel now knew, was on his way to the airport. He had left his home, which was 25 miles from the airport, 20 minutes before, but he was making slow progress through the thick snow.

	In the end the traffic stopped moving altogether. He lit a cigar.

	Many stories were told about Joe Patroni.

	He had begun his working life as a motor mechanic in a garage. One day he won an old plane from someone in a card game. Without any help he repaired it and taught himself how to fly it. He studied at night school and went to work for TWA as a plane mechanic.

	Soon everyone knew that he was the best mechanic TWA had. Whenever there was an urgent or difficult repair job, they called Joe Patroni. He never wasted time and always told people exactly what he thought, regardless of how important the person he was talking to might be.

	Now he was TWA maintenance chief at Lincoln International. He had been successful in another way, too. He had married the most beautiful air hostess in TWA. Many people were surprised when Marie married a mechanic, but now, twelve years later and with three children, they still loved one another.

	Patroni waited for five minutes. Then he turned on the radio. He waited another five minutes and then decided to get out of the car.

	Someone called out: 'What's happened?' and another voice replied: 'There's been an accident.'

	Further along the road he found the reason for the delay. A sixteen-wheel heavy goods vehicle was lying on its side in the road. The police were trying to pull it off the road with a breakdown truck.

	Patroni walked straight up to a policeman. 'You'll never move that sixteen-wheeler with one truck,' he said. 'Never in a million years.'

	'Oh no?' the policeman replied. 'There's petrol on the road. You'd better put that cigar out.'

	Patroni took no notice of his advice, and continued 'What you ought to do is this-'

	The policeman did not need to listen for long before he realized that this man knew what he was talking about. Ten minutes later Joe Patroni was in control of the whole operation. Two more breakdown trucks were on their way, and chains were being put around the damaged vehicle.

	As he worked, Patroni felt increasingly worried about the situation at the airport, where he knew that he was badly needed. But helping to clear the road, he thought, is probably the most useful thing I can do now. I can't get to the airport until the road is clear.

	He stopped work to go back to his car and telephone the airport. There was a message for him from Mel Bakersfeld. Runway three zero was urgently needed.

	When he left the car the snow was still falling heavily. He was glad to see that the first of the two additional breakdown trucks had arrived.



	CHAPTER FIVE

	The Blocked Runway

	Mel went outside. His car, which had its own two-way radio, was waiting for him close by.

	The strength of the wind was frightening. Freezing air came into the car through an open window, and he closed it quickly.

	It was difficult to see anything, but as he drove out to the airfield Mel could see that several planes were waiting to take off. He saw the lights and the passengers sitting ready in their seats.

	On his radio he heard messages passing between planes and Ground Control. The controller sounded tired, and this made him think of his brother, Keith. He hoped that he would be all right tonight.

	Mel told the controller where he was going. It took him a quarter of an hour to reach the blocked runway. Out here the storm seemed to be wilder and more violent.

	A shadowy figure called out to him: 'Is that Mr Patroni?'

	'No,' Mel shouted, 'but he's on his way here.'

	'We'll sure be glad to see him - but I don't know what he'll do. I think we've tried everything already.'

	Mel asked the man his name.

	'Ingram, sir,' he replied. 'I'm Aereo-Mexican maintenance manager. At the moment I wish I had some other job.'

	Ingram's face was blue with cold. He told Mel that all the passengers had been taken off the plane. It seemed to be impossible to get the plane out of the mud.

	'It'll take a long time,' he said. 'Most of tomorrow, I guess.'

	'It can't take a long time,' Mel said sharply. 'We need this runway quickly.'

	Suddenly he shook, and not only with the cold. He had the feeling that something terrible was about to happen. He had had this feeling once before, long ago.

	He went back to his car to speak to Danny Farrow.

	'Where's Patroni?' he asked.

	'I'll find out,' Danny promised. 'There's something else, Mel. Your wife called.'

	'Did she leave a number?'

	'Yes.'

	'Please tell her I'll be a little late.'

	Mel lit a cigarette and waited for Danny to call him back.

	In a few minutes Danny told him: 'Patroni won't be here for another hour. He's stuck in the traffic. He says to tell the Aereo-Mexican people not to try to do anything until he arrives.'

	There was another message. Cindy had phoned again. Danny didn't complain, but Mel guessed that she had been angry and had been rude to him.



	CHAPTER SIX

	Vernon Demerest

	Captain Vernon Demerest was 3 miles from the airport, driving his Mercedes towards a large apartment block where many of the air hostesses lived.

	Parties were often held in these apartments, and love affairs between pilots and air hostesses were frequent. Vernon Demerest had had affairs with quite a large number of the beautiful and intelligent girls who lived here.

	Tonight he was going to visit an attractive, dark-haired English girl. Gwen Meighen was a farmer's daughter who had come to America ten years ago, when she was eighteen. Before becoming an air hostess she had been a fashion model.

	Later tonight they would fly to Rome together on the Golden Argosy, and spend three days in Italy before returning to the United States. They planned to go to Naples together. Vernon smiled happily as he thought of those three days. Everything was going so well for him this evening.

	He had arrived at the airport early, after saying goodbye to his wife, Sarah. She was a quiet, dull woman, and in a way this was very useful to Vernon. She never asked him about his relationships with other women, and while he was married to her, no other woman could expect him to settle down with her.

	Then there was the critical report the Airlines Snow Committee had made on Mel Bakersfeld. That pleased Vernon too. Now Mel would never again dare to criticize Vernon in public - as he had done recently.

	He stopped the Mercedes outside the apartment block. He was a little early. He could imagine Naples well - a warm night, soft music, wine with his dinner and Gwen Meighen beside him. He began singing happily to himself.

	Vernon would not be flying the plane himself tonight. The pilot was Captain Anson Harris, a pilot only a little less experienced than Vernon. Vernon would be checking on Harris's flying and making a report on it.

	Other pilots hated being checked by Captain Demerest. He always seemed to try his hardest to find fault with them. He had already succeeded in making Captain Harris very angry, by telephoning him at home to remind him not to be late. Harris had been a pilot for 20 years, and had never once come to the airport late. Then Vernon had met him at the airport and told him that he should be wearing a TWA shirt as part of his uniform. At first Harris had thought that he must be joking. The shirts were badly made and few of the pilots wore them. In fact, he knew that Vernon himself did not wear one! When he had realized that it was no joke he had gone dark red in the face with anger, but somehow he had managed to control himself and say nothing.

	Oh yes! It would be a very easy flight - for Vernon Demerest!

	He knocked on Owen's door, and then went in without waiting for an answer. Gwen was in the bathroom.

	'Vernon, is that you?' she called.

	Even her voice was soft and attractive. He had noticed the effect she had on passengers - especially on men.

	Her clothes were laid out on the bed. She had the same uniform as all the other girls, but under it she wore underwear of the finest French silk.

	'I'm glad you came early,' she called. 'I want to have a talk with you before we leave.'

	'All right. We've got plenty of time.'

	'Would you like to make some tea?'

	Gwen had taught him to make tea in the English way. Sarah wondered why he drank so much tea these days!

	He went into the kitchen to make the tea. He began singing again happily.



	CHAPTER SEVEN

	Out on the Airfield

	The biting wind blew across the airfield. It was as strong as ever and it drove the falling snow ahead of it.

	As he drove to runway one seven, left, Mel was shaking with cold although it was warm in his car. Was he shaking just because of the cold, he wondered, or was it also because of his memories?

	The pain in his foot helped to remind him of something that had happened 16 years before, when Mel had been a pilot during the Korean War.

	One day he had had a strange feeling, the knowledge that something terrible was going to happen. Next day his plane was shot down into the sea. It was sinking fast and his foot was trapped. He had saved his own life by cutting at his foot with a knife. After a long time in hospital he was able to walk, but he would never be able to fly a plane again.

	The strange feeling that he had had before that experience was with him again now.

	Only two of Lincoln International's runways, one seven, right, and two five, were in use now. One seven, left, was being cleared and would soon be back in use. The longest and widest of the five runways was three zero, which was blocked by the Aereo-Mexican plane.

	Since the storm began, men had been working on the runways. They had to work quickly and carefully, as more than 4 inches of dry snow on the ground was dangerous for a large plane. Mel wished that the public could see the way these men worked, and the great machines they used.

	When he reached the men, one of them called to him; 'Why don't you join us, Mr Bakersfeld? Have a ride on a snowplough!'

	Mel smiled. 'Thanks. I will.'

	He climbed in beside the driver of one of the machines. He knew the man. Usually he worked as a clerk.

	'How are you, Will?' Mel asked.

	'Fine. A bit tired.'

	'Everyone's tired. All I can say is, it can't go on for ever.'

	'I like this work,' Will told him. 'It makes a change from working in the office.'

	Mel understood his feeling. He too needed to get out of his office sometimes, and stand on the lonely airfield in the wind and snow. That was where he always went when he needed to think hard about something important. He had plenty to think about tonight. The airport's future, and his own.



	CHAPTER EIGHT

	Cindy Gets Angry

	Less than five years earlier the airport had been among the most modern in the world. Many people thought that it still was. They were wrong. Few people realized how old-fashioned Lincoln International had become.

	Passengers usually saw nothing but the main terminal, with its bars, restaurants and shops. They did not notice that there were not enough runways. This meant that there was a take-off or a landing every thirty seconds on the two main runways, and when the airport was very busy the Meadowood situation made it necessary to use a runway which cut across one of the other two. The result was that planes were landing and taking off on flight paths which crossed one another.

	The people who worked in Air Traffic Control knew exactly how dangerous this was. Only a week before Keith had said to Mel: 'There hasn't been a crash here yet, but one day there will be. I only hope that I'm not on duty when it happens.'

	Now, as Mel rode in the snowplough, he watched the rapidly moving lights of a plane as it took off. Then, almost unbelievably close to the first plane, he saw more lights as a second plane landed.

	'They were close,' the driver said. Frighteningly close, Mel thought.

	Mel had often spoken about the need for more runways to the Airport Committee and to the City Council - the people who controlled the airport's spending. They refused to believe that a new airport had become too small so quickly.

	Perhaps Keith was right, and there would have to be a big crash before they would be able to see the situation as it really was.

	A decision had to be made soon, Mel knew. The airport must either look to the future or fall back into the past. The same was true of Mel himself. Only a short time ago he had been spoken of as a young man who would get to the top in aviation. Now many people doubted whether he could.

	At the end of the runway he left the snowplough and drove back to the terminal in his own car. He was thinking about what had happened to him only a few years before.

	He had been president of the Airport Operators' Council then, and the youngest man ever to reach that position. One day he had made a speech to the Council about the future of air transport. He had spoken of the need for good and imaginative planning in airports all over the world, and his speech had been well received in many different countries.

	Next day, he was invited to the White House to meet President Kennedy. He found that he could talk easily to the President, and that they agreed about many things. On more and more occasions the President began to ask Mel's advice about aviation. Great success seemed to be close for him.

	Then President Kennedy was killed. His early death was a terrible shock to the whole nation, but Mel felt that he had lost a friend. Later he realized that the new President did not intend to ask him for advice. He was no longer the promising young man of aviation.

	When he reached the terminal he spoke to Danny Farrow.

	'Any news about the Aereo-Mexican plane?'

	'No, I'm afraid not.'

	'Where's Joe Patroni?'

	'Still on the road.'

	'Let me know when he gets here,' Mel said.

	'You'll be at a party, won't you?'

	Mel stopped and thought. He had told Cindy that he would go to the party, but now he felt that he should stay at the airport.

	'No,' he said. 'I'm not going to the party.'

	'Then I think you ought to ring your wife.' Danny told him. 'I'll give you her number now.'

	Mel rang her immediately. There was a moment's silence while he waited for her to come to the phone. Then he heard her voice say sharply: 'Mel, why aren't you here?'

	'I'm sorry, but I couldn't leave. There've been some problems here. It's a big storm, and-'

	'I don't want to listen to excuses! Just get here fast!'

	Her voice was hard with anger. Mel tried to remember her as she had been before their marriage 15 years ago. Her voice had been soft and gentle then. She had been an actress, although not a very successful one. Later she liked to claim that she would have been a great success if she had not married Mel.

	'I'll be at the party as soon as I can,' he told her.

	'That isn't good enough. You should be here now. You promised you would come!'

	'Cindy, I didn't know there would be this storm! We have a runway out of use-'

	'You have people working for you, don't you? Or are they all so stupid that you can't leave them?'

	'No,' said Mel. 'They're all highly trained workers, but I'm responsible for what they do. That's my job.'

	'You don't behave very responsibly to me and you're my husband. Isn't that more important?' Cindy replied.

	Mel realized that she was ready to explode with anger. He pictured her looking more beautiful than ever with her big blue eyes flashing. Cindy was a very attractive woman, and anger made her more attractive. In the past their quarrels had only made him feel that he was lucky to have such a beautiful wife. But now he noticed her beauty less. She never complained about this change in him, and this made Mel think that perhaps she had found a lover. The sad thing was that he did not really care whether she had or not.

	'I don't want to spoil your fun,' he told her. 'I know you like going to parties, but I don't. What I would enjoy are a few more evenings at home with the children.'

	'That's not true,' Cindy said. 'And you know it.'

	He felt himself grow hot with anger. He tried to control himself, but it was impossible to control Cindy. Her voice was angry but low, and Mel guessed that she didn't want the other guests at the party to hear her.

	'I'll come as soon as I can,' he said again.

	'Everyone else's husband is here already. Unless you intend to leave the airport immediately, please don't come at all! But if you decide not to come it will be the end for us. Do you understand me?'

	'No, I don't think I do,' Mel said slowly. 'Will you tell me exactly what you mean?'

	'You understand all right,' Cindy said, and put the telephone down.

	As he walked back to his office, Mel's anger grew. Unlike Cindy he did not lose his temper easily, but now he was burning with anger.

	He was angry not only with Cindy, but also with himself. He felt that he had failed in more than one way. He had failed to make a success of his work in aviation and of his marriage. His children would suffer because of his failures.

	In his office he threw off his coat. It fell on the floor and he left it lying there. He lit a cigarette, but it tasted terrible and he put it out immediately. His foot hurt.

	Long ago there had been a time when Cindy had understood his pain. She used to make him take a hot bath and try to help him to forget it. Now she would never do that again.

	In sadness, he put his head in his hands.

	When the telephone rang he did not hear it at first. Then he answered it. 'Bakersfeld here.'

	'This is Air Traffic Control,' he heard. 'We have an emergency.'



	CHAPTER NINE

	Keith Bakersfeld

	Keith Bakersfeld was on duty in the Air Traffic Control radar room.

	The storm was having a serious effect on radar control, although the wind and snow themselves could not be seen here. Unlike the other Air Traffic Control rooms, the radar room had no windows. The controllers worked under low lights.

	Everything in the room seemed calm, but it was a false calm. Beneath it the men always lived on their nerves, and tonight the pressure on them had been increased by the storm. In the last few minutes something else had happened to increase it even more. The effect of this was like tightening a thread which is already close to breaking.

	A double signal had appeared on the radar screen like a beautiful green flower. It represented a plane in trouble. This was the emergency that Mel had been told about.

	The plane was a US Air Force KC-135. It was flying high above the airport in the storm, and was asking for an immediate emergency landing. Keith had seen the emergency signal appear before him on the screen. A manager had come to help him, and now both men were sending urgent messages to other controllers and by radio to other planes.

	The screen they were working at was a circle of dark green glass about the same size as a bicycle tyre. It was covered with bright points of light, each of which showed the position of a plane. Tonight the screen was unusually full of these dots.

	Keith was clearly very nervous. His face was thin and the green light from the screen showed the deep hollows under his eyes. During the last year or so he had changed completely in appearance and manner from a friendly, smiling person to a silent, unhappy man. He was six years younger than Mel, but he looked much older.

	The men who worked with Keith had all noticed the change in him, and they knew the reason for it. They did care about his problems, but they had to put their own jobs first, and they had little time to help him. That was why Wayne Tevis, the manager, stayed near Keith and watched him all the time. Tevis knew that he might have to send Keith off duty early in order to rest.

	He said to Keith now: 'Look, Keith, that Braniff flight is getting too close to Eastern. Turn Braniff right and then you can keep Eastern on the same course.' Keith should have seen that himself, but he hadn't.

	The problem which most of the controllers were working on was to clear a path for the Air Force KC-135 to land. It was difficult to do this because five other planes were already circling above the airport, waiting to land. To the sides of the airport, too other planes circled. It needed strong nerves to guide the KC- 135 between all these other planes safely. To make the situation even worse, radio communication with the KC-135 had been lost.

	Keith spoke. 'Braniff eight twenty-nine, make an immediate right turn.' At a moment like this a controller's voice should be calm. Keith could not control his voice, and he sounded as nervous as he was.

	In another minute or two the Braniff flight would have to be turned again, and so would several other flights. This would continue until the KC-135 had been brought safely down through them. The passengers on the other planes, although they might be tired or frightened, would have to wait.

	For a moment Keith wondered how the pilot of the KC-135 felt in his difficulty and danger. Lonely, probably. Keith himself was lonely. Even when he was surrounded by other people, he felt that he was alone.

	He gave new paths to several flights. Behind him he could hear Wayne Tevis trying to reach the KC-135 by radio, with no success. The green signal on the screen showed that the pilot was doing the right thing. He must know that his position could be seen on the radar screen, and that the controllers would clear a path for him.

	All around him Keith could hear low voices. Everyone was working to the limits of their strength and abilities. A controller had to hold so much in his mind. Even the best controller knew that one day he might make a mistake, with terrible results.

	Keith had been one of the best controllers. Until a year ago others had asked him for help and advice. Now he had to accept help from them. He must not make any mistakes tonight.

	Nobody knew, not even his wife, Natalie, but this was the last time Keith would ever sit in this radar room. It was also the last day of his life.

	'All right, Keith,'Tevis said. 'Go and take a break.'

	Keith knew that the time for his break was not for another half an hour. Tevis did not trust him. Should he argue with him? No, Tevis was right not to trust him.

	He waited for a few minutes while the man who would take his place studied the screen. The effort needed was enormous. As a result of this many controllers suffered from bad health. Others became very short-tempered, and many found that their marriages ended in divorce.

	As Keith left the room, Tevis told him: 'Your brother said he might come and see you later.'

	Keith was glad to be alone now. He wanted a cup of coffee and a cigarette. He went to the small rest room used by the controllers. Now that he had a few minutes to think clearly, he hoped that the KG-135 would be brought down safely.

	He lit a cigarette and took out some food which Natalie had prepared for him. Sometimes she put a little note in with the food. She tried hard to make him laugh and to help him through his troubles. But recently her eyes had been red from crying and she had written fewer notes. Perhaps she knew that it was hopeless.

	He wanted to help her, but how could he when he could not help himself? He had a photograph of her in his pocket, showing her on holiday in Canada, happy and smiling. She loved him, he knew. He tried to love her, but he had no love left now, only hopelessness.

	Mel, too, loved Keith as much as any brother could, but he could not help him either. Nobody could help Keith now.

	He opened the bag of food. No note today. It was better this way, really. Natalie knew nothing about what he planned to do.

	When he came off duty at the airport he would go to a hotel where he had taken a room. The room key was in his pocket. He took it out to check.



	CHAPTER TEN

	The Meeting in Meadowood

	The information which Mel Bakersfeld had been given about a meeting in Meadowood was quite correct.

	The meeting had started half an hour earlier in a church hall. It had started late because the 600 people who had come had to fight their way to it through thick snow. But they had come.

	They were the sort of people you would find in any small town. An equal number of men and women were present. As it was Friday night, most of them were dressed informally. Several newspaper reporters were also there.

	The room was uncomfortably crowded and full of smoke. All the chairs were taken, and at least a hundred people were standing.

	Only an extremely serious matter could have brought them out from their warm homes on such a terrible night. They were all, at the moment, extremely angry.

	They were angry for two reasons. First, because of the noise which could be heard night and day in their homes, and second, because even during this meeting the noise of planes taking off was making it impossible for them to hear one another. In fact, it was unusually noisy tonight. Of course, they did not know that this was because runway three zero was blocked by the Aereo-Mexican plane, so that runway two five was being used. This was the runway nearest to Meadowood.

	During a short silence, the red-faced chairman announced loudly that it was impossible to live in such terrible conditions.

	'We have tried to reason with the airport management,' he shouted, 'but they take no notice of our suffering.'

	The chairman was Floyd Zanetta, the sixty-year-old manager of a printing company. Near him sat a younger man, a lawyer called Elliott Freemantle.

	'What do the airport and airlines do?' Zanetta shouted. 'I'll tell you! They pretend to listen to us. They make empty promises to us. They are nothing but cheats and liars!'

	The word 'liars' was lost in a sudden, almost unbelievable burst of sound. The room shook, and a glass of water on a table near Zanetta almost fell to the floor. The noise ended as suddenly as it had begun. This had been happening since the beginning of the meeting.

	Zanetta continued. 'As I said, they are cheats and liars. I think what is happening now proves it, and-'

	'Mr Chairman,' a woman's voice interrupted, 'we've heard all this before. What I and all the others here want to know is what we can do about it!'

	'If you'll kindly let me finish-' Zanetta said. He never did. Once again, the terrible noise exploded over them. Some people even began to laugh, and Zanetta looked hopelessly around him.

	He began to speak again, telling the people of Meadowood that they could not afford to be polite any longer. He had brought Elliott Freemantle, a lawyer who had made a special study of cases like theirs, to give them some good advice.

	He talked on and on. Elliott Freemantle was getting restless.

	He wanted the old fool to stop talking and sit down. Elliott had taken care to dress well and expensively for this meeting. He knew that people liked their lawyers to look successful.

	He was hoping to become even more successful over this airport business. Few of Elliott's colleagues believed that he knew much about law, but they all had to admit that he knew how to make money. In fact he had made no special study of noise problems, but he was clever enough to have made Zanetta believe that he knew all about the subject.

	Thank God! Zanetta had finished at last! Before he had even had time to sit down, Elliott was on his feet and talking.

	'If you're expecting me to be kind and understanding, you can go home now,' he began roughly. 'I'm not offering you my shoulder to cry on. My business is law, and nothing but law.'

	This speech made everyone look up. He saw that he had their attention. The reporters began writing busily.

	'I have no interest in your personal problems,' he told them. 'My only aim is to see that justice is done. I'm selfish and I'm single-minded, but I'll be able to help you where a nice understanding lawyer would fail.'

	He watched their faces closely as he spoke. He had guessed correctly that they were tired of words and ready for action. He noticed a man who was whispering to his wife, and guessed from the expression on his face that he was saying: 'This is what we wanted to hear.'

	'Now listen,' Elliott said. 'I'm going to talk about your problem.'

	He told them that laws about noise were changing fast. In many recent cases it had been proved that an airport could be taken to court by ordinary people just like the people who lived in Meadowood. And they could win, too. An airport could be forced to pay them a large amount of money. He did not tell them how rarely this happened, and how often people lost such cases. In fact, he didn't really care whether they won or lost their case. He thought that they would probably lose - if the case ever reached the courts at all. What he wanted was the money they would pay him. He had already calculated that he could make twenty-five thousand dollars out of these people. All that they had to do was to sign a paper which named him as their lawyer.

	He finished his speech with these words: 'There is no time left for anything but action. Action now!'

	A young man who was sitting near the front of the hall sprang to his feet. 'Tell us what to do!' he shouted.

	'You must start - if you want to - by signing this paper.'

	'Yes, we want to,' several hundred voices replied.

	The meeting had been a great success, just as Elliott Freemantle had expected it to be.

	He had promised them action, and that was what they would get. The action would begin at the airport. Now. Tonight.



	CHAPTER ELEVEN

	A Ruined Man

	At the same time that Elliott Freemantle was enjoying his success, a former builder called D. O. Guerrero was tasting the bitterness of failure.

	He was about 15 miles from the airport, in a locked room in a poor, dirty apartment on the south side of the city. The apartment was above an evil-smelling eating house.

	D. O. Guerrero was a thin, sickly sort of man, with an unhealthy, yellowish face, deep hollows around his eyes and pale, thin lips. He was losing his hair. He had nervous hands, and could not keep his fingers still. He smoked continuously, lighting a fresh cigarette from the end of each old one. He needed a wash and a clean shirt. He was fifty, but he looked several years older.

	He was married, and had been for 18 years. In some ways it had been a good marriage. He and Inez accepted one another, and their married life had been calm and uneventful. D. O. had always been too busy to be interested in other women. But in the last year he and Inez had grown apart. He could no longer share his thoughts with her. This was one of the results of a number of business failures which had made the Guerrero family poor. They had been forced to leave their comfortable home and to move to cheaper and cheaper apartments, and in the end to this dark and dirty hole.

	Inez did not enjoy living like this, but she would have been able to bear it if her husband had not become so strange and bad- tempered recently. At times it was impossible to talk to him. A few weeks ago he had hit her across the face, hurting her badly. He refused to show any sorrow or even talk about it later. After that, Inez had sent their two children - a boy and a girl - to stay with her married sister, and had taken a job in a coffee shop. She had to work hard, and did not earn much, but they needed the money for food. D. O. hardly seemed to notice that the children had gone.

	Inez was at work now. D. O. was alone in the apartment. Like a number of other people, he was about to leave for the airport. In his coat pocket he had a ticket for Trans America Flight Two to Rome. Inez did not know anything about the ticket or why her husband had bought one.

	The ticket cost four hundred and seventy-four dollars. D. O. had paid forty-seven dollars and had promised to pay the rest over the next two years. It was highly unlikely that the money would ever be paid. He had got the forty-seven dollars by selling his wife's last possession, her mother's ring.

	Only an airline would have been foolish enough to sell a ticket to D. O. Guerrero in this way. Airlines were very ready to lend money - perhaps because most of the people who bought tickets from them were so honest.

	Guerrero was a ruined man. There was no money to pay what he owed. He would probably be sent to prison if the police ever found out about some of his business deals. He did not even have the money to pay the rent on this cheap apartment. Soon he and Inez would be homeless. He could see no future for them.

	His plan was to blow up Trans America Flight Two. He himself would die, but he did not care about that. His life was of no value now to himself or his family, but his death would be of great value. He had decided to take out life insurance for seventy-five thousand dollars, and to save his family from ruin by his death.

	In his hopelessness he had no thought or pity for all the people who would die with him. He believed that he was acting out of love for his family.

	He had been thinking about his death for several months now. He believed that his plan was perfect. He had made a study of such cases, and intended to learn by the mistakes other people had made. The plane must disappear completely. Four hours after take-off it would be high above the Atlantic Ocean. If it exploded there, the pieces would be lost in the sea. Nobody would ever be able to find out the truth about how the crash had happened.

	Guerrero had made a simple but deadly bomb, small enough to put into a little, flat case that he could carry with him onto the plane. He had only to put his hand into the case and pull a string. It would all be over in a second. The public did not know how easy it was to make a bomb. As a builder, Guerrero had often used explosives, and he had no difficulty in finding what he needed.

	He hid the bomb under some clothes and papers in the case and looked at the clock. Two hours before take-off. Time to go to the airport. He had just enough money to get there and to buy the insurance policy.

	One last thing! A note for Inez. He thought for a few seconds and then wrote: "I won't be home for a few days. I'm going away. I expect to have some good news soon, which will surprise you." He signed it "D. O."

	He paused. It seemed so little to say after 18 years of marriage, but it would be dangerous to say more. The police were certain to examine the note later. He left it on the table.

	As he went out, he could hear music and laughter coming from downstairs. It was still snowing.



	CHAPTER TWELVE

	Joe Patroni Clears the Road

	Once again Joe Patroni returned to his warm car and telephoned the airport. He reported that the road to the airport was still closed, but that it would be possible to move the heavy vehicle that was blocking it. He was told that the Aereo-Mexican plane was still across the runway, and that everyone was calling for him to come and help them to move it.

	He hurried back to the group of people around the crashed goods vehicle. It lay on its side, covered with snow now, like a huge dead animal. Three more breakdown trucks had arrived, as Patroni had requested. Their lights shone on the white snow and made it as bright as day.

	Some television cameramen had also arrived, and were behaving as if the accident had been arranged specially for them. Everything would have to wait until they had got some good pictures on film.

	When Patroni had gone to phone the airport, he had left the breakdown trucks in the best positions to pull the crashed sixteen-wheeler off the road. Chains were being put around it. When he came back, the chains had gone and the trucks were in a different place. A crowd of people had come to watch the television cameras.

	Wet snow had got inside the collar of Patroni's coat. It was uncomfortable, and it added to his anger. He rushed up to a policeman and demanded; 'Who took the chains off the sixteen- wheeler? And what fool moved the breakdown trucks? Where they are now, they're useless!'

	'I know,' the policeman said, 'but they'll look better on television like this.'

	Patroni remembered the serious situation that was waiting for him at the airport, and felt ready to break the television cameras. He was strong enough to do it, too. He had a hot, violent temper, but he had learned to control it long ago.

	In his youth he had killed a man in a boxing match. Since then he had been careful to control himself. These days he reasoned with people instead of hitting them.

	He told the policeman who was in charge of the operation: 'You've just blocked the road for a further 20 minutes, playing the fool with those television cameras. I told you, there's an emergency at the airport. Now listen to this! I've got a phone in my car, and I can tell my chief at the airport what you're doing. If he passes on the information to your chief you may be in big trouble, my friend.'

	For a moment, the policeman looked as if he was going to shout at Patroni. Then he turned to the cameramen and shouted: 'OK, no more filming! Get those cameras out of the way!'

	He had realized that Joe Patroni knew what he was talking about. He let Patroni direct the operation, and soon the breakdown trucks were pulling the heavy goods vehicle off the road. Snowploughs moved in quickly to clear the snow away.

	The distant sound of a plane reminded Patroni of what he had to do at the airport. He started to walk back to his car.

	'Thanks a lot!' the policeman called after him.



	CHAPTER THIRTEEN

	Gwen

	Captain Vernon Demerest whistled in surprise when he saw what was inside Gwen's kitchen cupboard. He had been looking for some teacups, and instead he had found a cupboard full of bottles. All of them had airline names on them. There were about 300, he calculated.

	'I've got some more in the bedroom.' Gwen's voice said brightly from behind him. 'They're for a party. I think this will be enough, don't you?'

	She had come into the kitchen quietly, and he turned around to look at her. Every time he saw her he thought again how lucky he was, although he was used to success with women. Her uniform made her look very young, and her black hair and dark eyes shone under the kitchen light. She smiled at him.

	'You can kiss me,' she said. 'I haven't put on my make-up yet.'

	He put his arms around her and kissed her. After a few moments, she pushed him away.

	'I want to talk to you,' she said firmly.

	She turned to close the cupboard door.

	'Wait a minute, Gwen!' Vernon cried. 'What about all those bottles?'

	'Well, the passengers didn't drink them, so they will be useful for my party. I've been collecting bottles off flights for a long time for a special occasion.'

	Seeing his face, she continued: 'Don't look so disapproving. All the girls do it. It isn't stealing, you know.'

	Vernon had heard before that a clever air hostess could live cheaply off the food that the passengers didn't want. Some of their apartments were full of things like airline cups and glasses, too. But he had never seen so much airline property in a girl's apartment before. He had to laugh.

	'You'll come to the party, won't you?' Gwen asked.

	'If I'm invited.'

	'Of course you are.'

	They sat down in the kitchen and she poured the tea - into airline cups. She did it beautifully, as she did everything.

	Vernon was still thinking about all those bottles, when her voice interrupted his thoughts.

	'What I have to tell you, Vernon, is that I'm going to have a baby'

	For a moment he could not believe his ears.

	'You're what?'

	'I'm going to have a baby,' she repeated calmly.

	'Are you sure?'

	She laughed and drank a little tea. He felt that she was laughing at him. He also felt that she had never looked so beautiful before.

	'Of course I'm sure. I wouldn't tell you otherwise. More tea?'

	'No!'

	There was a silence before he said: 'I don't know how to ask you this, but ...'

	'You must ask,' Gwen said, looking at him with her big, honest eyes. 'You want to know if I'm sure that it's your child, don't you?'

	'Yes, I'm sorry, Gwen.'

	'Don't be sorry,' she said. 'I want to tell you.' She was speaking quickly now, and did not sound so calm. She looked down.

	'There hasn't been anybody else. There couldn't be. You see - I love you. I've loved you for quite a long time now.'

	Vernon took her hands gently in his. 'Listen to me. We have plans to make.'

	Now that the first shock was over, he was thinking about what they would have to do.

	'You don't have to do anything,' Gwen said. 'I intend to look after myself. I had to tell you because the baby is yours and you have the right to know about it.'

	'Of course you must allow me to help you,' he said.

	She could either give the baby away or have an abortion. An abortion would be the best solution to the problem. He would pay, of course. After all, he wasn't irresponsible. But how annoying! He needed all his money at the moment for some work he was having done on the house.

	He asked: 'You're still coming to Naples with me?'

	'Of course. I've been looking forward to it. Don't you believe I love you? Do you love me?'

	He kissed her. 'Yes, I love you.' It was true, he thought - at the moment.

	As they drove off to the airport in his Mercedes, he told her: 'You really mustn't worry, Gwen. This happens to lots of girls. I suppose you know all about the Three Point Plan?'

	'I've heard of it, of course.'

	The Three Point Plan was the name given to the airlines' way of helping an air hostess in her situation. The airline paid for the girl to take a "holiday". The baby would be given away soon after its birth, and she would never see it again. She had to tell the airline the father's name, and he was asked to help pay her medical bills. Later, she could return to her job.

	Vernon told Gwen all the details of the plan.

	'How do you know so much about this?' she asked.

	'Oh, everybody knows about these things.'

	'Not all the details,' she said. 'Vernon, this has happened to you before, hasn't it?'

	He paused, and then admitted: 'Yes, it has.'

	'How many times?' she asked. Her voice was bitter.

	'Only once.'

	'What happened to the baby?'

	'It was given away.'

	'Was it a boy or a girl?'

	'I think it was a girl.'

	'You think it was a girl? Don't you know?'

	'It was a girl.'

	He didn't want to talk about his daughter. He had never seen her.

	'Thank you for telling me the truth,' Gwen said.

	He took her hand. 'We'll have a great time in Naples, I promise you.'

	He almost wished that he could divorce Sarah and marry Gwen - but that would be stupid. He had seen too many other men of his age make fools of themselves over young women. It usually ended badly. He had failed so far to talk to Gwen about the possibility of an abortion. He must do that later. As they drove into the airport he realized that now he had to think about the flight to Rome, and nothing else.



	CHAPTER FOURTEEN

	Keith Remembers

	The key was to Room 224 of a hotel near the airport.

	Standing in the small rest room near the air traffic radar room, Keith Bakersfeld realized that he had been looking at the key for several minutes. Or was it only a few seconds? Recently he seemed to have lost all sense of time. Natalie had found him more than once just standing still and looking at nothing. He supposed that his brain was like a worn-out motor that was no longer working properly.

	The human brain could do wonderful things. It could produce great works of art and science. It could also keep alive the pain of memories that a man would prefer to forget. Keith had memories that he could never forget. Only his death, which he had decided would take place tonight, would end his suffering.

	He must go back to the radar room now and finish his duty. That seemed to be the right thing to do. Then he would go to the hotel and swallow a large amount of Nembutal. Enough to make him go to sleep and never wake up again.

	He looked at the key. Room 224. The number reminded him of what had happened on June 24th a year and a half ago. It was the beginning of his pain, and the reason he would die tonight.

	June 24th had been a beautiful summer's day, with a clear blue sky and hardly a cloud in sight. Keith had felt happy and light- hearted as he drove to work. He was not working at Lincoln International then, but at the Washington Air Traffic Control Centre in Leesburg.

	Even inside the radar room, which had no windows, he felt the beauty of the summer's day.

	The Leesburg Centre was not near an airport, but it was one of the busiest air traffic control centres in the country. Helped by a man called Perry Yount, Keith controlled traffic in the Pittsburgh-Baltimore area. There was also another young controller, George Wallace, who was being trained by Keith.

	He went into the control room and looked at the screen. It was quite busy. Perry Yount had some additional work to do today, and left Keith to work alone with George Wallace. George would finish his training and become a full controller in only one week from now. Keith allowed him to give directions to two planes which were coming too close to one another, and saw that he was making the correct decisions. Keith was a successful teacher, and he was proud of Wallace's progress.

	From time to time Perry Yount came to see if Keith and Wallace needed any help. Everything was going well. Then, just before 11 o'clock, Keith had to go to the washroom. Perry Yount agreed to stay near Wallace until he returned.

	Keith stayed a long time in the washroom. It had a window, and he could look out and see green fields and flowers. It was a hot day, and he felt that he would rather go out into the fresh air than back into the control room. He often felt like this.

	***

	After Keith had left, Perry Yount had an emergency to deal with. A passenger on a plane had had a heart attack. He had to clear a way for the plane to land at Washington.

	***

	At the washroom, Keith wondered how much longer he could keep doing this job. He was very tired. He was thirty-eight, and had been a controller for 15 years. He felt that he was getting old.

	Doctors knew that controllers became ill more often than people in less responsible jobs. Few other jobs put so much pressure on a man, and for many it was too much. They often found it difficult to sleep, and suffered from nervous diseases. Some controllers were like old men at the age of forty-five.

	He looked out of the window again. If only he could go out! But he had to go back to the control room. He would go back - in a minute.

	***

	Perry Yount was bringing the plane down safely over Washington, changing the courses of 15 other planes in order to clear a path for it. He handled the emergency well, as he always did. Whenever he had a free moment, he checked that George Wallace was all right. He seemed to be. Keith would soon be back to help them.

	Keith was still at the window. He was thinking now of Natalie. They had started to quarrel recently, for the first time. She wanted him to save his health by changing his job. But how could he? This was the only job that he knew how to do.

	***

	High above West Virginia, Irving Redfern was flying his small private Beech Bonanza to Baltimore. With him were his wife, Merry, and their two children, Jeremy and Valerie. Wallace saw the Redfern's plane as a small green dot among the larger dots of airline planes. Redfern was following a safe course.

	But there was something that neither Yount, Wallace nor Redfern knew. An Air National Guard T-33 trainer was flying in the area. The pilot, Captain Neel, was experienced but careless.

	Without realizing it, he had wandered a long way off course. His plane appeared as a dot on the edge of George Wallace's screen Wallace did not notice it.

	***

	A man can't just leave his job, Keith was thinking. Not if he has a wife and children to look after. Unlike pilots, controllers did not earn a lot of money. But he couldn't leave the safety of a job he knew he was good at. He would have to talk to Natalie again. Looking at his watch, he realized that he had been in the washroom for 15 minutes. He must have been dreaming! He hurried back to the control room.

	As he came in he noticed that everyone was busier than before. He looked at the screen.

	'What's the other traffic near the Beech Bonanza?'

	'What other traffic?'

	Then Wallace saw the fast-moving dot on the edge of the screen. 'Oh my God!' he cried out.

	With a single rapid movement Keith pushed him to one side and seized control. He shouted to Irving Redfern: 'Make an immediate right turn now!'

	Captain Neel's plane was rushing towards the Beech Bonanza.

	If Irving Redfern had acted immediately, he might have saved himself and his family. He was a good pilot, but not a professional, and he was a polite man who always thought before he acted. Now he wasted the few seconds he had by replying to Keith's message.

	In the control room they watched in silence, praying hard, as the bright green dots flew towards one another.

	'Washington Centre, this is Beech-' they heard, and then the voice suddenly stopped.

	The dots on the screen met, and up in the clear blue sky the Beech Bonanza was falling, spinning wildly, to the earth.

	Then the terrible thing happened, the thing that Keith would ever forget. The radio of the Beech Bonanza was still working. The cries of the Redfern family were heard clearly in the control room, and the voice of nine-year-old Valerie was especially clear. All over the control room faces turned white, and George Wallace broke down and cried as he heard her cries of terror. 'Daddy! Do something! I don't want to die! I don't want to die!' The small plane crashed and burned with the Redferns inside it. Captain Neel landed safely by parachute, 5 miles away.

	***

	Perry Yount was blamed for the crash, and he lost his job. George Wallace could not be held responsible, but he could never now work as a controller. They were both ruined men. Yount had to go into hospital, and then, began to drink heavily.

	Keith was not blamed in any way for the crash, but he knew in his heart that he was responsible. If he had not stayed in the washroom for so long on that lovely summer's day, the Redfern family would still be alive.

	He got little sleep, and when he did sleep he had terrible dreams. They always ended with the hopeless cries of little Valerie Redfern. Sometimes he tried to stay awake, so that he would not dream of her again. During the day, too, he thought about her. He could not look at his own two healthy children without feeling guilty.

	His work suffered. He lost the ability to make quick decisions. Natalie begged him to change his job. Once, almost crying, she told him that unless he did something she would take the children away from him, because she could not bear to see them growing up in such an unhappy home.

	It was then that Keith first thought of killing himself. He put his hand in his pocket and touched the key again. He would need it soon.



	CHAPTER FIFTEEN

	The Stowaway

	It was almost an hour since Tanya had left Mel. She remembered his words: 'It will give me an excuse to come and see you again.'

	She knew that he had to go to a party with his wife, but she hoped that he would come and see her before he left.

	The 'excuse' that he had spoken of was his interest in the message received by Tanya while in the coffee shop. The stowaway was with Tanya now. A little old lady from San Diego. She was wearing a black dress, and looked like somebody's grandmother on her way to church.

	'You've done this before, haven't you?' Tanya asked her.

	'Oh yes, my dear. Quite a few times.'

	She sat there looking quite untroubled by her conscience, Tanya wondered if many people realized how many stowaways there were on planes these days. Probably not. Airlines tried to keep quiet about it.

	The old lady's name was Mrs Ada Quonsett, and she would certainly have reached New York if she had not made one mistake. She had told her secret to another passenger, who had told an air hostess.

	'All right,' Tanya said. 'I think you'd better tell me all about it.'

	'Well you see,' the old lady began, 'My husband's dead, and I have a married daughter in New York. Sometimes I get lonely, and I want to visit her. So I go to Los Angeles and get on a plane to New York.'

	'Without a ticket?'

	Mrs Quonsett looked surprised. 'Oh my dear, I couldn't possibly afford a ticket. It's difficult enough for me to find the money to get to Los Angeles on the bus.'

	'Do you pay for the bus ticket?'

	'Oh, yes. They always check the tickets on the bus.'

	'Why don't you fly from San Diego?' Tanya asked.

	'I'm afraid, my dear, they know me there.'

	'You mean you've been caught at San Diego?'

	'Yes,' the old lady said quietly.

	'Have you been a stowaway on many different airlines?'

	'Oh yes, but I like Trans America best.'

	Tanya wanted to laugh. She could hardly believe her ears. 'Why do you like Trans America, Mrs Quonsett?' she asked.

	'Well, they're always so nice to me in New York. After I've stayed with my daughter for a week or two and I want to go home, I go to the airline offices and tell them.'

	'You tell them the truth? That you came to New York as a stowaway?'

	'Yes, my dear, of course.'

	Tanya was amazed. 'And what happens then?'

	The old lady looked surprised. 'Nothing happens. They send me home. Sometimes they get a bit angry and tell me not to do it again, but that isn't much, is it?'

	'No,' Tanya said, 'it certainly isn't.'

	The really unbelievable thing, she thought, was that it was all true. Airlines knew that it often happened. They also knew that it cost more to delay a flight in order to check the passengers than to allow an occasional stowaway to travel free.

	'You're nice,' Mrs Quonsett said. 'You're a lot younger than most of the airline people I've met. You must be about twenty- eight.'

	'Thirty-seven.' Tanya said sharply.

	'Well, you look very young. Perhaps it's because you're married.'

	'Stop it,' Tanya told her. 'It isn't going to help you.'

	'But you are married.'

	'I was. I'm not now.'

	'What a pity. You could have beautiful children with red hair like your own.'

	Red, Tanya thought, not grey - the grey that she had noticed that morning. She had a child, anyway. Her daughter was at home now, sleeping.

	'You've broken the law,' she told Mrs Quonsett. 'I suppose you realize that you could be charged?'

	'But I won't, will I?' replied the old lady, smiling. 'The airline won't do anything. They never do.'

	Tanya knew that it was true.

	'You've had a lot of free travel from Trans America, Mrs Quonsett,' she said. 'Now I'd like you to help us a little.'

	'I'll be glad to if I can.'

	She asked Mrs Quonsett to tell her how she got on to flights without a ticket. The old lady knew a surprising number of tricks.

	When she had finished, Tanya said: 'You seem to have thought of everything!'

	'My husband taught me to be thorough,' Mrs Quonsett replied. 'He was a teacher, and an extremely thorough man himself.'

	The telephone rang. It was the Transport Manager.

	'Have you spoken to the old woman yet?' he asked Tanya.

	'Yes. She's with me now.'

	'Did she tell you anything useful?'

	'Yes, I'll send you a report. And I need a ticket to Los Angeles for her. We'll send her back tonight.'

	'I hate to put her before all the honest passengers,' the manager said,' but I suppose we'll have to.'

	The old lady had one more important thing to tell Tanya.

	'It's best not to take a direct flight,' she said. 'They get rather full, and then they give all the passengers seat numbers. It's better to take an indirect flight.'

	'What do you do at stops?'

	'I pretend to be asleep. Usually they don't trouble me.'

	'But this time you were found.'

	'Only because of that man who was sitting next to me.' Mrs Quonsett said bitterly. 'I told him that it was a secret, but he told an air hostess. You can't trust anyone these days.'

	'Mrs Quonsett,' Tanya said. 'I expect you heard what I said on the phone a few minutes ago. We're sending you back to Los Angeles tonight.'

	'Yes, my dear, I thought you would. Just let me go and get a cup of tea first, and I'll be ready to go.'

	'Oh no!' Tanya shook her head. 'You're not going anywhere alone.'

	She asked a young agent called Peter Coakley to stay with Mrs Quonsett until her flight left.

	'Don't let her get away from you for a second,' she told him. 'And be careful! She's full of little tricks.'

	The old lady took Peter Coakley's arm. 'You're rather like my daughter's husband,' she said. 'He's a good-looking young man, too, but older than you of course. What nice people work for Trans America!' She looked at Tanya. 'Some of them are nice, I mean,' she said.

	Tanya felt sure that she had not seen the last of Mrs Ada Quonsett. Then she started to think about Mel Bakersfeld again, and wondered if he would come and see her.



	CHAPTER SIXTEEN

	Mel's Argument with Vernon

	Mel had decided that it would be impossible for him to leave the airport that night.

	He was in his office, and had been getting the latest reports on what was happening on the airfield. Runway three zero was still blocked, and there were many delays. It was possible that the airport would have to be closed in a few hours.

	Planes were still taking off over Meadowood, and many of the people who lived there had telephoned the airport to complain about the noise. Mel knew that there had also been a meeting, and now it seemed that some of the people from the meeting were coming to the airport. They would add greatly to the problems which he already had.

	One good thing was that the emergency was over. The Air Force KC-135 had landed safely. But Mel still had the feeling that there was going to be another emergency, and that it would be worse than this one.

	Cindy was waiting for him at the party. He must phone her immediately, although she wouldn't be very pleased to hear what he had to say.

	He had to wait for several minutes before she came to the phone. He was surprised at how quiet her voice was. There was no anger in it now, only an icy calm.

	He had not expected this, and found it difficult to talk to her. He told her that he would not be able to come to the party, and then paused, uncertain what to say next.

	'Have you finished?' she asked coldly.

	'Yes.'

	'I'm not surprised at what you've just said. I never expected you to come. I knew that you were lying to me, as usual.'

	'I wasn't lying, Cindy, and-'

	'I thought you said you'd finished?'

	Mel stopped. Why argue with her?

	'You're staying at the airport?' she went on,

	'I told you I was.'

	'How long?'

	'Until midnight. Possibly all night.'

	'Then I'm coming to see you there.'

	'Listen, Cindy, you can't come here. This is neither the time nor the place.'

	'Then we'll make it the time. And for what I have to say, any place is good enough.'

	He tried to reply, but she had already put down the telephone.

	He sat in silence for a moment, and then, without knowing why, he called home. Mrs Sebastiani, who was looking after the children, answered.

	'Is everything all right?' Mel asked. 'Are the girls in bed?'

	'Roberta is, Mr Bakersfeld, but Libby's still awake.'

	'May I speak to her?'

	He heard her small feet running to the phone. As usual, she had a question for him: 'Daddy, does our blood keep going around and around for ever?'

	'Not for ever, dear,' Mel told her. 'Nothing's for ever. Your blood has been going around for seven years so far.'

	'I can feel my heart,' she said.

	Mel was sure that she could. Libby had a good heart - whichever meaning you gave to the word.

	He didn't know why he had telephoned home, but he was glad that he had. He supposed that Cindy would come to see him tonight. If she wanted to do something she usually did it. Perhaps she was right, and it was time to decide whether their hollow marriage should continue or not. If they talked about it here, at least the children would not have to hear them.

	At the moment he had nothing to do. He left his office, and looked down over the crowded hall. He thought again that so much in the way airports worked was wrong and would have to change in the near future.

	He saw a crowd in front of a notice that said 'Flight Two - Rome - the Golden Argosy'. Tanya was standing near it, talking to a group of passengers. Mel walked towards her, and when she saw him she left the passengers for a moment.

	'I mustn't stop,' she said. 'I've got so much to do here. I thought you were going to a party!'

	'My plans have changed,' Mel told her. 'Why are you still on duty?'

	'I've been asked to stay. We're trying to make it possible for the Golden Argosy to take off on time. I think it's because Captain Demerest doesn't like waiting.'

	'Don't think too badly of Captain Demerest,' Mel said, smiling. 'Although I do have doubts about him myself.'

	Tanya pointed to a desk where two pretty girls were standing. 'That's the reason for your fight with Captain Demerest, isn't it?' she said. The two girls were busily writing insurance policies.

	'Yes,' Mel admitted. 'That's a large part of the problem. Vernon thinks that we should stop selling flight insurance at airports. I don't. We had a battle about it in front of a lot of important people. I won, and Vernon hates being the loser.'

	'I heard all about it.' Tanya looked hard at Mel. 'A lot of us agree with Captain Demerest.'

	'I'll just have to disagree with a lot of you, then,' Mel replied.

	He remembered his fight with Vernon well.

	***

	It had happened at a meeting of the Airport Committee. Mel and all five committee members were present: a woman called Mrs Mildred Ackerman, two local businessmen, a union official and a teacher. The only outsider at the meeting was Captain Vernon Demerest. They decided to hear what he had to say first.

	He spoke confidently and well. He argued that flight insurance was an insult to modern planes and pilots. Insurance policies were not sold at bus stations and garages! Why should they be sold at airports? Flying, he said, was a safe way to travel. Insurance companies and airports continued to sell flight insurance in order to make money out of the public. To sell huge insurance policies for a few dollars at airports was to invite criminals and madmen to murder for money, Vernon said.

	'Do you have any facts to support this view?' Mrs Ackerman asked.

	In reply, Vernon spoke of many cases of people who had blown up planes in an attempt to claim large amounts of money. They had failed, but others would continue to try.

	Mrs Ackerman was not satisfied with this answer, and interrupted Vernon several times with questions. He was not used to being attacked, especially by a woman! People usually took orders from him. He lost his temper immediately, and made it clear that he thought her questions thoroughly stupid.

	He had argued his case well, but nobody would agree with him because of his rude behaviour. Even before he began to speak, Mel knew that he had the advantage.

	He told the meeting that many people, rightly or wrongly, were afraid of flying and liked to have insurance. If they couldn't buy it at the airport, they would simply buy it somewhere else. But his most important point was that the airport needed the money that it made by selling insurance policies. This was certain to be a popular argument with the committee.

	After the meeting Vernon was waiting for him.

	'Hello, Vernon,' Mel said quickly. 'I hope we're still friends.'

	'We're not,' Vernon said, 'and we never have been.'

	They both knew that this was true.

	'You people who work on the ground, safe behind your little desks, can't possibly understand how we pilots feel about this matter. If you could only see things as clearly as I do-'

	'I've been a pilot, too, Vernon,' Mel said. 'I wasn't always flying a desk, remember. And you may find this hard to believe, but you could be wrong. You're human too, I believe.'

	'You're childish and stupid!' Vernon shouted. 'Keep away from me in future. I don't want to see you any more than I have to!'

	If only it had never happened. Mel could not change his opinion about insurance, but he wished that he had not made an enemy of Vernon.

	***

	'You're dreaming,' he heard Tanya say. She was looking at him with a smile in her gentle, understanding eyes. Suddenly he knew that he wanted to get to know her better. He wished he could accept the offer she had made him earlier, of a good dinner at her apartment. But he had to accept the facts and behave responsibly. He couldn't leave the airport yet.

	'Let's meet for dinner later tonight,' he said. 'Don't leave the airport without me.' He wanted to reach out and seize and hold her, but there were crowds of people all round them.

	Tanya put her hand on his. 'I'll wait for you,' she said. 'I'll wait as long as you want me to.' Then she walked away through the crowd of waiting passengers.



	CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

	The Golden Argosy

	Forty-five minutes before it was supposed to take off, the Golden Argosy was being prepared for its 5,000 mile flight to Rome. Some of the preparations for a long-distance flight take weeks, or even months. Others are made at the last moment.

	The plane for Flight Two was a Boeing 707-320B. It had four engines and a speed of 620 miles an hour. It could carry 199 passengers.

	Its last flight had been from Dusseldorf, Germany, to Lincoln International. During the flight, one of the engines had become too hot. The plane flew safely on three engines, and the passengers knew nothing about it. If necessary, it could have flown safely on one engine.

	When it arrived at Lincoln International, a team of mechanics was waiting. The repairs took a long time and demanded great skill and care. The plane was not ready to fly again until two hours before it was to leave for Rome.

	As soon as the repairs were finished, the job of loading the plane began. Large amounts of food and drink were taken on board, and so were newspapers and magazines. Finally, the passengers' luggage and bags of mail were loaded onto the plane. For some reason this was the most badly-managed part of the operation, and luggage was quite often lost or sent on the wrong flight.

	Captain Harris had decided to ask for additional fuel tonight. The plane might be delayed for a long time on the runway before take-off, and the engines drank up fuel thirstily.

	Anson Harris was not feeling very comfortable. After Vernon Demerest had told him to put on an airline shirt, he had borrowed one from a friend. It turned out to be too small for him. He decided to suffer in silence, as he did not intend to quarrel with Vernon. Harris was a professional pilot of the best kind, and he knew that it was dangerous to have quarrels with colleagues on a plane. With Vernon Demerest checking all his decisions tonight, he didn't want to make any mistakes.

	Another man would be flying with Vernon Demerest and Anson Harris. He was the flight engineer, a thin young man called Cy Jordan, who was also a pilot.

	A bus took them all to the Trans America wing of the airport. As well as the three men there were five air hostesses, one of them being Gwen Meighen. Captain Demerest greeted them with a bright 'Hi, girls!' Captain Harris, more formally, said Good evening.'

	The bus moved slowly on the icy road. They could all feel the wind beating against it. When it stopped, they rushed towards the nearest door. They had their final preparations to make.

	It was now that Captain Harris asked for additional fuel to be taken on board. Vernon checked the weather report. He learned that the weather would improve over the Atlantic, and that in Rome - and also in Naples - it would be fine.

	The three men were ready for take-off when Gwen told them the news. 'The flight has been delayed by an hour,' she said. 'It seems that a lot of the passengers haven't arrived yet, because of the bad weather.'

	'Oh no!' Vernon said angrily.

	'Shall I bring you some coffee?' Gwen suggested.

	'No, I'll go and get some in the terminal,' he said. 'Come with me, Gwen.'

	As they were walking to the coffee shop, Vernon thought that the delay might turn out to be very useful for him. He could have another talk with Gwen, and this time they would discuss abortion.



	CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

	Guerrero Leaves Home

	Nervously, D. O. Guerrero lit another cigarette from the end of his last one. His hands were shaking. He could not hide his fear - fear that the plane would leave without him, fear that he would be a failure once again.

	He was on a bus on his way to the airport. The bus was moving very slowly through the snow and the heavy traffic. The passengers had been told that Flight Two, which they were all to travel on, had been delayed by an hour. But it might take them two or three hours to reach the airport, and Flight Two would not wait for them for ever.

	There were only a few people on the bus. The driver said that he thought a lot of people had gone to the airport by car, to try to get there quickly. Everyone was talking about their chances of reaching the airport in time. Only Guerrero said nothing.

	Most of the passengers were tourists, but there was also an Italian family with several children.

	'Don't worry,' the driver said,' we might just get there in time.' But they were still moving as slowly as before.

	D. O. Guerrero passed his tongue over his dry lips. He needed ten or fifteen minutes at the airport, in order to buy his flight insurance. It would not be enough for him simply to catch the flight; he must have the insurance, too. He hadn't known that the weather would be so bad. He always had bad luck! All his great plans failed. But this one must not fail! He had already made one stupid mistake, he thought bitterly.

	He was carrying no luggage except the small case that contained the bomb.

	When he had gone to catch the airport bus, the ticket agent had asked him; 'Where are your cases, sir?'

	Guerrero paused. 'I don't have anything but this.'

	'No luggage for a trip to Rome, sir?'

	The man looked surprised, and Guerrero thought that he was looking at him strangely.

	'No,' he said, and hurried to the bus.

	He knew that the agent would not forget his face. Later, when the questions were asked, he would remember the man with no luggage.

	He should have brought some luggage!

	But the plane would be completely destroyed, he reminded himself. They would not be able to prove anything against him. The flight insurance company would have to pay Inez.

	Would this bus never get to the airport?

	The Italians' children were running up and down the bus, and their baby was crying. Guerrero wanted to cry out at them to stop making that noise. Didn't they know that this was no time for playing or talking?

	One of the running children fell into the seat next to

	Guerrero and almost knocked his case onto the floor. He raised his hand to hit the child, and then, with an effort, managed to control himself. It would be stupid to draw attention to himself.

	For a moment the boy looked into his eyes, and Guerrero found that he had to look away. They would all be dead soon. The children too. He couldn't afford to become soft-hearted now. In any case, it would all be over before they knew what was happening.

	At last! The bus was moving faster. They might arrive in time. There seemed to be less traffic on the road now.

	He was glad that he had not hit the child. But it was a pity that he had forgotten to bring any luggage with him. He began to worry about it. Perhaps the agent had telephoned the airport. The police might be waiting for him as he got off the bus.

	If they were, Guerrero decided, he would pull the string and blow himself up. Whatever happened, he would not go to prison.

	He wondered if Inez had found his note yet.

	She had.

	***

	Inez Guerrero came into the apartment, feeling very tired, and took off her wet coat. Her shoes were wet, too, and they hurt her feet. She was getting a cold, and her work in the coffee shop had I seemed harder than usual today. She was not used to this kind of work, and now she ached with tiredness.

	Two years ago, in her own comfortable home, Inez had been a pleasant-looking woman. Her pretty face had disappeared with their money. In better days, she had looked younger than she was; now she looked much older. She would have liked to take a hot bath, but there was only a cold, dirty bathroom which was shared by three families. Inez could not bear to go into it. Instead, she went into the living room. She had no idea where her husband was. After a while she saw a note on the table. She read: "I won't be home for a few days. I'm going away. I expect to have some good news soon, which will surprise you. D. O."

	Few things that her husband did surprised Inez. He had often made plans without asking her advice. Good news would be a wonderful surprise, but she didn't really believe that there would be any. She had seen her husband's plans fail so many times before.

	But where was he going? And what money did he have? She knew that he had only a few dollars in his pocket, because they had counted their money the day before. They had had twenty - two dollars, and she had taken fourteen to help pay the rent. She remembered the look of sadness she had seen on her husband's face as he put the remaining few dollars into his pocket.

	She decided to stop worrying and go to bed. She opened a drawer to put her clothes away and noticed that some things had been moved but that D. O. did not seem to have taken any clothes with him. In the drawer she found a piece of yellow paper; she learned from it that D. O. Guerrero had bought an airline ticket to Rome. He had paid forty-seven dollars, and had promised to pay the rest over two years.

	Inez could not believe it. Why did he need an airline ticket? And why to Rome? How could he have paid forty-seven dollars?

	Then she remembered her mother's ring. Before she looked in the box, she knew that it had gone. She was upset that he had sold the ring. It had been her last reminder of her past life, of her family, and of happier days.

	Why had he gone to Rome?

	Inez was not a very clever woman, but she understood her husband. Somehow she knew that he was in trouble, and that she must try to help him. He had been behaving strangely recently.

	She did not think of leaving him to solve his own problems.

	She had married him 'for better or worse', and the fact that it had been mainly 'worse' did not mean that her responsibility to him had lessened.

	She forgot her tiredness, and hurried out in her wet clothes to find a telephone. She phoned Trans America and discovered that the flight to Rome had been delayed by an hour. It would leave at eleven o'clock instead of the usual ten o'clock.

	It was now five past ten.

	'Please, can you tell me if my husband is on the flight?' Inez asked. 'His name is D. O. Guerrero.'

	'I'm sorry, but we are not allowed to give any information about passengers,' was the reply.

	'But I'm his wife!' Inez cried.

	'I'm sorry, but I can't break a company rule.'

	She would have to go out to the airport herself, and try to find him.

	She spent her last few dollars on a taxi. She was still on her way when the airport bus reached the terminal. D. O. Guerrero was the first person to step off it.



	CHAPTER nineteen

	Action at Meadowood

	The Meadowood meeting was ending on a high note of excitement, just as lawyer Freemantle had planned that it should. The meeting was about to move on to the airport.

	'I don't want to hear any excuses,' Elliott Freemantle said. 'Don't give me any stories about dinner being ready or the children being left alone. If your car is stuck in the snow, come with someone else. I'm going to the airport in order to help you people to get some justice.'

	He paused, as a plane passed over with a noise like thunder.

	'Good heavens! It's time someone did!'

	Everyone laughed and cheered at this.

	'I want all of you to come with me. Now I'll ask you just one question: Are you coming?'

	'Yes!' they shouted. 'Yes!'

	Elliott then told them that to take the airport to court was not enough. They also needed to have the attention and support of the public.

	'How do we get that attention and support?' he asked, and then answered his own question: 'We get it by telling people all about our problem. We must interest the newspapers, radio and television, in any way that we can. We must give them a good story!'

	The three reporters who were present smiled at this.

	'Do as I tell you,' Elliott directed the people. 'Perhaps we'll cause a little trouble at the airport. I hear that they're rather busy tonight. But we must be careful not to break any laws.'

	They were all ready to go. Elliott Freemantle looked at the papers that they had signed, and calculated that he had made about ten thousand dollars for himself from this evening's work. Not bad. The money was always the most important thing to him.

	He did not know exactly what was going to happen at the airport, but he guessed that there would be plenty of action and excitement. He would keep these people satisfied and they would pay him well for this entertainment.

	He noticed that one of the reporters was on the phone to his office. Good! Now it was time to leave for the airport.



	CHAPTER TWENTY

	Joe Patroni Arrives

	It had taken Patroni three hours to reach the airport. It usually took him 40 minutes.

	When he came to the sign that said 'TWA Maintenance' he jumped out of his car, paused just long enough to light a cigar and then got into the truck which was waiting for him. 'Get moving! As fast as you can!' he told the driver.

	As they raced away, he called the control tower by radio telephone.

	'We have a message for you,' he was told.

	'What is it?'

	'Joe,' the message went,' I'll give you a box of cigars if you can get that plane off runway three zero tonight.' The message was from Mel Bakersfeld.

	Patroni laughed. 'Now I've got something to work for!' he said.

	Ingram told him what had been happening. First they had taken all the passengers off the plane and had tried to use its own power to move it. That had failed. Then all the luggage, mail and most of the plane's fuel had been taken off. Still they could not move it.

	Patroni examined the ground around the plane. He did not seem to notice the cold or the snow that was falling on his hands and face. He found that the plane was badly stuck in the wet ground which lay under the ice and snow, but in spite of this he hoped that it would be possible to move it by its own power.

	They would have to dig deep holes with sloping sides, and line them with wooden boards. Then, if they were lucky, the plane could be driven out. It was not going to be an easy job.

	'The captain's still on board the plane,' Ingram told him. 'He refused to do what we asked him to when we first started trying to move the plane. Now I think he's a frightened man. He's made some bad mistakes tonight.'

	'He sure has,' Patroni agreed. 'Get the men working, and I'll go and talk to him.'

	Later, Patroni joined the maintenance men and worked with them. He thought that the job would take at least an hour. It was now half past ten, and he hoped to be back home and in his warm bed soon after midnight.



	CHAPTER TWENTY ONE

	In the Coffee Shop

	In the coffee shop Vernon Demerest ordered tea for Gwen and black coffee for himself. Coffee helped him to think clearly, and he would probably drink ten more cups on his way to Rome.

	'We're both unusually quiet,' Gwen said in her gentle English voice. 'We hardly said a word on our way over here.' She turned her large eyes towards Vernon's face.

	'I wasn't talking because I've been thinking,' he said.

	'Thinking about what? About being a father?' Gwen said, smiling. 'Would you rather have a boy or a girl?'

	'Oh Gwen, can't we be serious about this?'

	'Why should you be worried if I'm not?' she asked. Then she took his hand and said: 'I'm sorry. I suppose it really is a bit of a shock - for both of us.'

	This was the opportunity Vernon had been waiting for. 'We don't have to be parents if we don't want to be,' he said. Gwen took her hand away.

	'I wondered how long it would take,' she said. 'You almost said it in the car, and then you decided to leave it until later, didn't you?'

	'Leave what until later?'

	'Oh really, Vernon! Why pretend? You want me to have an abortion, don't you? You've been thinking about it all the time, haven't you?'

	'Yes,' he admitted.

	'What's the matter? Did you think I'd never heard the word before?'

	'I wasn't sure how you would feel about it.'

	Gwen looked serious. 'I'm not sure how I feel.'

	At least she hadn't said 'no' immediately.

	'It would be the most sensible thing to do,' Vernon said. 'And it isn't dangerous at all.'

	'I know. It's very simple, isn't it?'

	Perhaps this was going to be easier than he had expected.

	'Vernon,' she continued, 'have you really thought about this? You want to kill a human being, a person who is part of both of us, a person we have made with our love.'

	'It is not a human being, Gwen,' he said firmly. 'It would be later, but it isn't now.'

	'Do you mean that you wouldn't kill it later, but you would now?'

	'Don't twist my words around, Gwen.'

	'I suppose you think I'm being stupid,' she said sadly, 'but I do love you, Vernon, I really do.'

	'I know,' he said. 'That's why this is so difficult for both of us.'

	Gwen sighed. 'I suppose in the end I'll be sensible. I'll have an abortion. But I must have a little time to think about it first.'

	'Of course. But we must act as quickly as possible.'

	'I promise you I'll decide before the end of this trip.'

	As they got up to leave the coffee shop, Gwen said: 'I'm really lucky to have you, Vernon. Some men would have walked away and left me.'

	'I won't leave you.'

	But he would leave her. He had just decided to. When the trip to Naples and the abortion were over, he would end the affair as delicately as he could. Gwen knew how to behave, and would not make any difficulties for him. Even if she did make trouble, he could handle the situation. He had ended love affairs before now.

	It was true that he cared deeply for Gwen. It would not be easy to leave her, but it was time to finish the affair. He did not intend to leave Sarah or to make any great changes to his lifestyle.

	He touched Gwen's arm. 'You go on. I'll follow in a minute.'

	He had just seen Mel Bakersfeld and, what was worse, he knew that Mel had seen him.

	Mel was talking to Ned Ordway, the man who was chief of police at the airport.

	'I've just heard that we're to have visitors later,' Ordway told him.

	'We have several thousand already'

	'I don't mean passengers. I mean the people from Meadowood. They've just had a meeting, and now they're coming to see you.'

	'Oh no!' Mel said. 'I'm busy enough tonight without them.'

	'I can't keep them out unless they break the law,' Ordway said. 'I've told my men what's going to happen, and they'll handle it carefully. We don't want any violence here.'

	Mel had complete confidence in Ned Ordway. He knew he was a good policeman.

	'Any other trouble tonight?' he asked.

	'More fights than usual. It's because of all the flight delays. All the bars are full.' He added: 'I'll let you know when the Meadowood crowd get here.'

	As Ordway walked away, Mel saw Vernon coming towards him. 'Good evening, Vernon,' he said.

	'Hi.'

	'I hear you know all there is to know about snow clearing now.'

	'I don't need to know much to see that a bad job is being done.'

	'Do you know how much snow there has been?' Mel asked.

	'I know better than you, I expect. Part of my job is to read weather reports.'

	'We've had about 30 centimetres of snow in the last 24 hours.'

	'Then clear it! '

	It was useless to try to discuss this matter with Vernon. Mel knew that his critical report on snow clearing had been written for reasons of personal dislike.

	'I'll think of you here, stuck in the snow, when I'm enjoying the sun in Naples,' Vernon said, and walked off laughing.

	But he soon stopped laughing when he saw the two girls selling insurance policies. They reminded him of a fight that Mel Bakersfeld had won. He wondered if any Flight Two passengers were buying insurance. He would like to tell them not to waste their money!

	As he watched, a thin, nervous-looking man joined the line of people waiting at the desk. He kept looking at the clock, and seemed to be worried because there were so many people in front of him. He should have arrived earlier if he wanted to stand in line for flight insurance, Vernon thought.

	As he hurried away, he heard the announcement: 'Trans America Airlines announce the departure of Flight Two, the Golden Argosy, for Rome-'





	CHAPTER TWENTY TWO

	Guerrero Insures Himself

	The flight departure announcement meant something different to each person who heard it.

	To some it meant a business trip, to others a holiday and the possibility of adventure. To some it meant the sadness of parting, and to others a happy meeting. Some heard the announcement with fear, and others with joy. They were all about to leave the safety of the ground for the adventure of the skies.

	More than a hundred and fifty Flight Two passengers heard the announcement, and hurried to Gate 47.

	Gwen Meighen welcomed them on board the plane. For her, the other girls and the three men in the team, this was the beginning of many hours of hard work.

	Mel Bakersfeld heard the announcement, and remembered that the Golden Argosy was Vernon's flight. He wished that he and Vernon could find some way of being polite to each other. Perhaps they couldn't be friends, but he didn't want them to be enemies for the rest of their lives. Part of the trouble was that Vernon, like many pilots, was terribly proud.

	Mel wished that he was still able to fly a plane. He had enjoyed being a pilot, but now he could only fly as a passenger. He was jealous of the people who were flying off into the Italian sunshine. He needed a little sunshine in his life, too.

	***

	Ned Ordway heard the announcement as he sat in his small office. He had just received a message from a police car, telling him that the Meadowood people had arrived at the airport.

	***

	Mrs Ada Quonsett stopped talking for a moment, and listened to the flight announcement. She was sitting next to Peter Coakley and telling him all about her dead husband.

	'Such a dear person,' she sighed. 'So wise and good-looking. When he was young he looked rather like you.'

	Peter Coakley was tired of hearing about Herbert Quonsett. He felt such a fool, sitting here in his uniform looking after this old grandmother. It was bad luck that her flight to Los Angeles had been delayed by the storm. He hoped that it would be able to take off soon.

	He had already forgotten Tanya's warning: 'Be careful. She's full of little tricks.' He didn't realize that making him tired of her could be part of the old lady's plan.

	'Rome!' Mrs Quonsett cried. 'Imagine that! It must be so interesting to work in an airport, especially for an intelligent young man like you. My dear husband always wanted us to visit Rome, but we never did.'

	While she was talking, she was also thinking. Why not go to Rome? That would be a story to tell her daughter! Her greatest success of all! She knew that she could easily escape from this child in a man's uniform. Gate 47, wasn't it? Yes, she would try.

	Suddenly she made a low noise and put her hand to her mouth. 'Oh dear! Oh dear!' she cried weakly.

	Peter Coakley looked frightened.

	'What is it, Mrs Quonsett? What's wrong?'

	She closed her eyes, breathing noisily.

	'I'm so sorry. I'm afraid I don't feel at all well.'

	'Do you want me to get you a doctor?'

	'I don't want to be any trouble!'

	'You won't be.'

	'No.' Mrs Quonsett shook her head weakly. 'I think I'll just go to the ladies' room. I expect I'll be all right.'

	The young agent looked doubtful.

	'Are you sure?'

	'Yes, quite sure.'

	She took his arm. At the door of the ladies' room she turned to him and said: 'You're so kind to an old lady. Thank you so much. You won't go away, will you?'

	'No, of course not.'

	In the ladies' room she looked for a woman with a kind face. She soon found one.

	'Excuse me,' she said. 'I'm not feeling very well. Could you help me?'

	'Of course. Would you like-?'

	'No - please. I just want to send a message. There's a young man in a Trans America uniform waiting outside the door. His name is Peter Coakley. Please tell him that, yes, I would like him to send for a doctor.'

	When he had gone to fetch a doctor, she sent the woman off to tell her daughter what had happened. Her daughter, she said, was "a lady in a long blue coat, with a little white dog". She hoped that the woman wouldn't waste too much time looking for her! She was feeling quite proud of her powers of imagination.

	When the kind woman had gone, Ada Quonsett came out of the ladies' room and walked quickly towards Gate 47.

	Tanya Livingston was dealing with a passenger who said that his luggage had been damaged, and demanded that the airport should buy him a new case. Tanya didn't believe that the case had been damaged at the airport. It looked very old. Some people will always try to cheat, she thought.

	She decided that when she had finished with this man, she would go to Gate 47. Perhaps she would be needed there.

	***

	D. O. Guerrero heard the flight departure announcement while in the line of people waiting in front of the insurance desk. It was Guerrero, appearing hurried and nervous, whom Vernon Demerest had seen arrive there.

	There were still four people in front of him. He would miss the flight. But he must not! He could not!

	He was shaking with nerves. He looked at the clock again. He had to do something! He could not just stand still and see his plan fail!

	He pushed his way to the front of the line. 'Please - my flight has been called - the one to Rome. I need insurance! I can't wait!'

	'We're all waiting,' a man said. 'Get here earlier next time' Guerrero wanted to say: 'There won't be a next time,' but instead he looked at the girl and said: 'Please!' again.

	To his surprise she smiled and asked: 'Did you say you were going to Rome?'

	'Yes, yes. The flight's been called.'

	'I know. The Golden Argosy.'

	She smiled at all the people who were waiting.

	'This gentleman seems to be in a hurry. I'm sure you'll excuse me if I see to him first.'

	***

	The girl was called Bunnie Vorobioff. She was a great success at selling insurance.

	When she smiled at the people who had been waiting before D. O. Guerrero, nobody complained. Even Guerrero, who did not usually take much notice of women, thought that she was attractive. She had a wide, white smile and a wonderful figure.

	Bunnie knew exactly how much power she had over men. She was using that power for a special reason today. D. O. Guerrero could not know this, but the insurance company that Bunnie worked for was holding a competition, with a big prize for the girl who could sell the largest amount of insurance. Guerrero was going to Rome. Bunnie hoped that she would be able to sell him a large policy for such a long flight.

	'What kind of policy do you wish to buy?' she asked him.

	'Life - seventy-five thousand dollars.'

	This policy would cost him two and a half dollars.

	He could hardly speak, and when he tried to light a cigarette his hand shook violently. He felt sure that everyone was looking at him and wondering why he wanted such a huge policy.

	'But that is a small policy! ' Bunnie cried. She leaned forward and smiled invitingly at him.

	'Small? - I thought it was the biggest.'

	'Oh no!' Bunnie laughed. 'Why not take a three hundred thousand dollar policy? Most people do. It only costs ten dollars.'

	He had not known that! It would be a fortune for Inez.

	'Yes,' he said eagerly. 'Please - yes.'

	Then he remembered something. Did he have ten dollars left in the world?

	He began to search feverishly through his pockets. He found four dollars. Behind him the other people were beginning to complain again.

	'You can give me Italian money' Bunnie said.

	'I don't have any'. He realized immediately that this was another mistake. Now he had told one person that he had no luggage, and another that he had no money. But the plane will be completely destroyed, he reminded himself. No proof will remain.

	To his surprise he found five dollars in a pocket. Then he found a few coins. Yes! He had enough! He could not hide his excitement.

	But now it was Bunnie's turn to stop. She had been watching his face while he counted his money, and in it she had seen hopelessness. Should she refuse to sell this man a policy?

	Bunnie wanted to win the prize. She paused for only a few seconds before she insured D. O. Guerrero's life for three hundred thousand dollars. He posted the policy to his wife, Inez. Then he rushed towards Gate 47 and Flight Two.



	CHAPTER TWENTY THREE

	Mrs Quonsett Escapes

	Customs Officer Harry Standish did not hear the flight departure announcement, but he knew that it had been made. He had a special interest in Flight Two, because Judy would be travelling on it. Judy was a fine young girl, and a great favourite with her uncle Harry.

	He was a very busy man, but he found time to walk over to Gate 47 to say goodbye to her. When she had gone he stood near the gate for a while, watching the last few passengers hurry by Tanya Livingston was watching them, too.

	A tall, fair young man went through the gate. He seemed to be the last one. Tanya left as soon as he had disappeared, but Standish saw two other people arrive. One of them was a small figure in black, a little old lady.

	'My son just went through this gate,' he heard her say to a ticket agent. 'He's a tall, fair young man. He's forgotten all his money. May I take it to him, please?'

	The agent was busy with his papers. 'Go and ask an air hostess,' he said, smiling kindly at the old lady.

	The last passenger came a moment later. He was a thin man who was carrying a small case. Something about this man attracted the officer's attention. He knew immediately, from his long experience in dealing with the public, that there was something strange about him.

	***

	He had successfully bought and posted the insurance policy, and he was on the plane. D. O. Guerrero felt full of confidence. All his difficulties were over.

	'Have a pleasant flight, sir,' the agent at the gate had said to him.

	His seat was by the window. There was an empty seat in the centre, and then another man. He closed his eyes. He felt happier than he had for a long time. He put his fingers inside the case and felt the important piece of string. When he pulled it, the plane would be destroyed immediately.

	Immediately? He hoped that there would be a last second in which he would know about his success. And then - thank heavens - no more.

	He opened his eyes. One of the air hostesses was counting the passengers.

	During the count, Mrs Ada Quonsett was hiding in one of the toilets. If she could remain hidden now, she knew that she had a good chance of reaching Rome. It had been a nasty shock seeing that red-haired woman at the gate, but in the end all her plans had gone well.

	She opened the door a little, and looked out. There was an empty seat between two men, and she decided to slip into it. As she did so, she was included in the passenger count.

	She hoped that she would find someone interesting to talk to during the flight. She knew that sooner or later she would be found and sent back to Los Angeles, but before that happened she intended to enjoy a film, a good meal and some pleasant conversation.

	She looked at the man on her left. He had a thin, yellowish face, and looked as if he needed a good dinner. Perhaps he was worried about something. He had a small case on his knees, and he was holding it firmly. Mrs Quonsett always wanted to know about other people, and she wondered what was inside the case.

	***

	Standish was talking to Tanya.

	'I watched the last passengers get on Flight Two,' he told her. There was one man I felt very worried about. If he'd been arriving instead of leaving, I would have asked him to open his case.'

	What do you think he's doing?'

	'I don't know. Oh, perhaps I'm wrong, but I have a strange feeling about him.'

	As Tanya walked back to her office, she wondered what - if anything - she should do about this.

	She found Peter Coakley waiting for her there.

	'What are you doing here?'

	He had to tell her that the little old lady had been too clever for him.

	Tanya was extremely angry. 'Didn't I warn you about her?' she shouted.

	All they could do now was telephone the gates and warn all the agents not to allow an old lady in black to get on a plane.

	Tanya knew that it was total war between Mrs Quonsett and her - and the old lady was winning.

	For a moment, her conversation with Standish was forgotten.

	***

	At the controls of the Golden Argosy, Vernon Demerest was beginning to lose his temper.

	'What are we waiting for? Why can't we take off?'

	He saw Gwen coming towards him. 'Gwen! What's happening?'

	She looked worried. 'The passenger count keeps going wrong. We're checking it now. We seem to have one passenger too many.'

	That, Vernon thought, was not a good enough reason to delay their take-off any longer, especially on a night like this, when traffic was very heavy. A delay like this was expensive as well as annoying.

	He did not waste time, but found the officer who was responsible for checking the passengers' tickets.

	'Look,' he said, 'the engines are running. We're using up fuel fast. There's a runway ready for us now, but there may not be later. If we wait for you to fool around any longer, there may be a really big delay. Now decide what you are going to do - but please, make the right decision!'

	As usual, Vernon won. The passengers were not checked again.

	'Rome - and Naples - here we come!'

	It was 11 o'clock. A tired, badly dressed woman almost fell as she ran towards Gate 47. She had no breath left to ask questions, but she could see that it was unnecessary to ask.

	Inez Guerrero saw the lights of a plane moving away from her into the darkness. She had arrived too late.



	CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR

	Take-Off

	The minutes just before take-off were a busy time for Gwen Meighen. First she had to welcome the passengers on board the plane. With her pleasant voice she tried to make the insincere words mean something. Then there were more important announcements to make, telling the passengers what to do in an emergency.

	They had not yet reached the runway when Gwen finished these. She noticed that they seemed to be moving slowly tonight, and guessed that this was because of the snow and the heavy traffic. She could hear the wind blowing hard outside.

	Her last announcement was the one she enjoyed making least. She had to tell the passengers that just after take-off the power of the engines would be reduced in order to lessen the noise they made. She told them that this always happened. It did not, as she knew. It was a dangerous thing to do, but Lincoln International had decided that planes which took off over Meadowood must do it.

	She knew what Vernon thought about this rule. He called it stupid and extremely dangerous. Thinking of him, she smiled. There were so many things about him that she loved.

	Looking out of the window, she could see the lights of another plane in front of them, and others waiting behind them.

	She sat down and prepared herself for the take-off. As the noise of the engines grew, there was only one question in her mind- Vernon's child and her own - should it live or die? How could anyone expect her to decide such a thing?

	Although Gwen had told the passengers that power would be reduced after take-off to lessen the noise, Captain Harris had decided that it would be too dangerous to do this during the storm. The people of Meadowood might complain, but he would not risk his plane and the lives of his passengers. At least this was one thing that he and Vernon Demerest agreed about!

	They had been lucky to reach the runway so quickly. The additional fuel taken on by Harris had not been needed. Now they were at the front of a long line of waiting planes, at the beginning of runway two five.

	Two five was cut across by another runway, one seven, left. As he waited, Harris could see through the snow the lights of a plane about to land on one seven, left. It crossed their path, and immediately he heard the controller's voice say: 'Trans America Two cleared for take-off. Go now!'

	He did not wait for a second. Above the airfield another plane was already approaching one seven, left.

	The Golden Argosy burst forward along the runway and then up into the clouds. The beginning of the flight would be rough, but soon they would be up in the clear sky, flying above the storm.

	Although Keith Bakersfeld was not controlling the take-off of Flight Two, he heard and recognized Vernon Demerest's voice. Like Mel, Keith was not particularly friendly with his sister's husband, although he had never quarrelled with him.

	As he worked, he kept putting his hand into his pocket to touch the key to the hotel room that he had taken.

	His thoughts of death were interrupted by Wayne Tevis.

	'Stop work for a few minutes,' he told Keith. 'Your brother is here to see you.

	'Hello,' Mel said. 'How are things?'

	'All right, I suppose.'

	Mel had brought two cups of coffee with him. He was always thoughtful like that. Keith watched his own hand shake as he took the cup. Mel was shocked by his appearance. He had never seen his brother looking so tired and ill before.

	Their father had been one of the first pilots. He had loved flying, and had been killed performing a daring trick in an air show. He had pushed his sons into a life in aviation, and perhaps, Mel thought, it had been the wrong thing to do to Keith.

	He opened the door. 'Come out for a moment, Keith. We'll be able to talk more easily out here.'

	When they were outside the door, he continued quietly. 'You look ill, Keith, as I'm sure you know. Please be honest with me, and tell me what's wrong. You look as if you need a holiday - or perhaps more than a holiday - from Air Traffic Control.'

	Keith smiled at him for the first time. 'You've been talking to Natalie.'

	This was true. Mel wondered if Keith knew how lucky he had been in his choice of a wife. He had always been a little jealous of their relationship. He couldn't help feeling that Natalie was a better woman than Cindy.

	'Keith,' he said, 'is it something to do with the accident at Leesburg? Is there something that you know about that crash that nobody else knows? Is that what's worrying you?'

	Keith paused for a moment before he answered, 'Yes.'

	'Please tell me, Keith. Let me try to help you.'

	'No. I can't.'

	But why not? he thought. He was going to kill himself. Perhaps he should share his terrible secret with his brother before he died. They had always been very close to one another.

	'You know something about the accident,' he began slowly, 'but you don't know everything.'

	'Go on. I'm listening.'

	The words began to pour out in a flood. Suddenly Keith wanted very much to tell Mel that the accident had been completely his fault. He, and only he, had killed the Redfern family and ruined the lives of Perry Yount and George Wallace.

	Without warning, a door opened. 'Oh Mr Bakersfeld,' a voice said. 'Could you phone Ned Ordway? He's been looking everywhere for you. So has Danny Farrow.'

	Mel wanted to cry out, to shout for silence, or at least a delay. But it was too late. Keith had stopped talking immediately. He was alone again, and as lonely as before. He was sorry now that he had started to tell Mel his secret. It was better that it should die with him.

	He went back to the radar room, and Mel knew that he would hear no more from him tonight. Mel himself had to talk to Danny Farrow and Ned Ordway. The police chief wanted to tell him that the Meadowood people were beginning to arrive at the airport. So far they had caused no trouble. But there was something else.

	A policeman had found a woman wandering about the airport crying. She was unable to tell him what was wrong with her, and he hadn't wanted to frighten her by taking her to the police station.

	'Then what did you do with her?' Mel asked.

	'I left her sitting outside your office. It's quiet there, and she can calm down and collect her thoughts.'

	'Is she alone?'

	'One of my men was with her, but he may have left by now. I'm sure she isn't dangerous.'

	'I'm going back to my office in a few minutes,' Mel said. 'I'll speak to her then.' He hoped that he would have more success in helping this woman than he had had with his brother. He was still very worried about Keith.

	'Did you take her name?'

	'Yes, I've got it here. Guerrero. Mrs Inez Guerrero.'

	***

	Tanya Livingston cried, 'You mean Mrs Quonsett's on board Flight Two?'

	'I'm afraid so, Mrs Livingston,' the ticket agent said.

	He was in Tanya's office. So was an extremely red-faced Peter Coakley.

	'I didn't think she could get past me like that,' the agent went on. 'But, I was so busy that she did. I was doing the work of two people all evening.'

	'Yes, I know,' Tanya said. She couldn't blame him. In fact, she blamed herself.

	'She said that her son had forgotten his money, and that she wanted to go and give it to him.'

	'She often says that. It's one of her many tricks.'

	'She sure can fool you,' poor Peter Coakley said.

	There was no doubt about it. Ada Quonsett was on her way to Rome. The flight had already taken off, and there were no stops. The old lady had won her battle against Tanya.

	When Peter Coakley and the agent had left, Bert Weatherby, the Transport Manager, wanted to see Tanya. She had to take full responsibility for Mrs Quonsett's presence on Flight Two.

	'Send a radio message to the captain and tell him what has happened,' Weatherby told Tanya. 'By the way, who is the captain?'

	'Captain Demerest.'

	'Oh no! He always loves it when other people make mistakes! Well, it was your mistake, and you must deal with it.'

	'Yes, sir.'

	Tanya tried to tell him about her conversation with Standish, but Weatherby had heard enough already.

	'Forget it!' he shouted. 'Let Italian Customs deal with the man. It isn't our problem.'

	But Tanya couldn't help worrying about the thin man with the small case.



	CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE

	Cindy's Decision

	In a taxi on her way to the airport, Cindy Bakersfeld leaned back and closed her eyes. She had a lot to think about.

	Her marriage to Mel was over. They had been growing slowly apart for a long time, and now Cindy realized that they had reached the end. Early in their marriage they had had the wonderful social life that she wanted, but now Mel seemed to have only one interest in life - the airport.

	The trouble had really begun at the time when Mel met President Kennedy. Cindy had hoped for invitations to the White House, and had dreamed of calling Jackie Kennedy her friend. It had never happened. After President Kennedy's death Mel put everything into his job. That left Cindy with nothing. She knew that she was not a very clever woman, and now her chief aim in life was for her daughters to become great social successes.

	This was something that Lionel would be able to help her with. As Mel had guessed, Cindy had found a lover. Lionel came from an old and respected family, and had plenty of money. He had left his wife, and now he wanted to marry Cindy. He was ready to act as a father to Roberta and Libby.

	True, he was not young or attractive, as Mel had been when she married him, but Cindy could see that there would be a lot of advantages in being married to such a man.

	She did not like making decisions, and she could not help remembering that she had once been happy with Mel, but she knew that the time for action had come. They could not go on living together.

	She paid the taxi-driver and hurried to Mel's office. There was a badly dressed middle-aged woman in wet clothes waiting outside the office. Her eyes were red from crying. Cindy did not take much notice of her, but went into the office and sat down to wait for Mel.

	When he came in a few minutes later, he seemed surprised to see her there. He had not really expected her to come, and wondered exactly what she wanted. She looked very beautiful tonight. He noticed it, but it no longer seemed to touch him.

	'Why have you come here?' he asked.

	'Why do you think?'

	'I think you want a fight. Don't we fight enough at home, without starting here?'

	'You don't spend much time at home these days.'

	'I would if it was more pleasant there.'

	It seemed that they could not talk to each other for a few minutes without quarrelling.

	'You pretend to be so busy here,' she continued.

	'Tonight I am.'

	'Tonight! What about all the other times?'

	'I admit it,' Mel said. 'Sometimes it has been more pleasant to stay here than to come home to a fight with you.'

	'You're being honest about it for the first time!'

	'And when I do come home,' he went on, 'you always seem to want to go out to some stupid party.'

	'Stupid party!' Cindy shouted angrily. 'So you never intended to come to the party tonight. I knew you wouldn't come! You're nothing but a liar!'

	'Calm down, Cindy'

	'I won't calm down!'

	What had happened to them? Mel wondered. Why were they behaving like two children?

	'I'm not a liar,' he said, 'although I am sometimes glad that my work here keeps me away from home. I really am busy tonight. For a start, I must see that woman who's waiting outside the door. She's in trouble.'

	'Your wife's in trouble,' Cindy said. 'That woman can wait.'

	'All right.'

	'Mel,' she went on,'this is the end for us, isn't it?'

	He did not want to agree with her, but he had to face the truth. 'Yes, I'm afraid it is. Neither of us will ever change enough to please the other.'

	'I've been thinking about this,' Cindy said slowly,'and I think I want a divorce.'

	'Are you sure? It's a big step to take.'

	'Yes, I'm sure.'

	'So am I,' Mel said sadly. 'I think it's the right decision for us to make.'

	There was no anger now. They were both very calm.

	'I'm sorry,' Cindy said,

	'I'm sorry, too.' Mel was close to tears at the thought of losing his daughters. They would remain with their mother. He knew that he would miss his talks with Libby very badly. Earlier this evening she had asked him for a 'map of February'. Well, now he had one.

	There was a knock at the door.

	'I'm sorry to interrupt,' Ordway said.

	'That's all right. What is it?'

	'The Meadowood people are here to see you.'

	He brought six representatives of Meadowood into the office. They were followed by Elliott Freemantle and three reporters. Cindy remained where she was, silent and angry at the interruption.

	Through the open door, Mel saw that the woman who had been waiting was standing now. When he looked again a moment later, he noticed that she had gone.



	CHAPTER TWENTY SIX

	Mrs Quonsett Enjoys Herself

	Trans America Flight Two was twenty minutes out of Lincoln International, and on course for Rome. It was flying above the storm, in a clear sky.

	Inside the plane, a radio message was being received. Anson Harris, Cy Jordan and Vernon all laughed as they listened to the description of Mrs Ada Quonsett, the stowaway.

	'I don't believe it!' Jordan said.

	'I do!' Vernon laughed. 'It's so easy to get past those fools on the ground. Even an old grandmother is too clever for them!'

	He asked Gwen to go and look for the old lady. When she came back she was laughing, too. 'She's all in black, and about eighty years old. A real threat to public safety! Shall I ask her to show me her ticket?'

	'No,' Vernon said, 'don't do that.'

	The others looked at him in surprise.

	'Let her enjoy the flight. Give her a nice dinner and let her see the film. You can tell her that we know who she is just before we get to Rome.'

	'Well, Vernon, you can be quite likeable sometimes!' Gwen said.

	'I didn't know you liked old ladies, Vernon,' Harris said, when Gwen had gone.

	Vernon laughed. 'I prefer young ones. I'm not like you, Anson!'

	Everyone knew that Harris had never cheated on his wife. When he was away from home on flights, Vernon had seen him reading books or going to a film - alone.

	'How many children have you got?' he asked.

	'Seven. Four we intended to have, and three we didn't. But we're glad to have them all.'

	'The ones you didn't intend to have. Did you ever consider doing anything about them? Before they were born?'

	'Do you mean abortion?' Harris asked sharply.

	'Yes.'

	'Never. It's something I have very strong views about.'

	'Because of your religion?'

	'No. I'm not a very religious man.'

	'Why then?'

	'Do you really want to hear all about it?'

	'Why not? We have all night.'

	They would be able to hear any radio calls that might come in, and they were free to talk.

	Harris told Vernon what he believed. He said that society had progressed by caring about people and by respecting their rights. Abortion refused a child the right to life, and to him this was as bad as murder.

	This was not at all what Vernon wanted to hear.

	'You should have been a lawyer, not a pilot,' he told Harris.

	'I told you that I had strong feelings about this. You don't need to be religious to respect human life.'

	'Or to have a lot of stupid ideas! Anyway, abortion is becoming easier all the time. Not many people agree with you.'

	'Then our society is taking a step backwards.' Harris replied firmly.

	'So you think it's right for unwanted children to grow up without any of the advantages of normal family life, do you?'

	'No, of course not. We should help them by trying to improve our society, not by killing them.'

	Vernon was beginning to wish that he had never started this conversation.

	'Let's get some food before the passengers eat it all,' he said. He didn't want to listen to any more of Harris and his old woman's arguments. Of course it would be right for Gwen to have an abortion - as soon as possible!

	Mrs Quonsett was enjoying a pleasant conversation with one of her neighbours, who was a musician.

	'How wonderful,' she said. 'My husband loved good music. He played a little himself, but not professionally, of course. What a pity he can't be here to talk to you!'

	Her new friend had already bought her one drink, and now he asked her if she would like another.

	'How kind of you,' she said. 'Perhaps I shouldn't say yes, but I really think I will.'

	Her other neighbour was rather a disappointment. She had tried to talk to him, but he had said almost nothing. He just sat there with his case on his knees.

	'Poor man,' she said to herself. 'Perhaps he has problems.'

	She enjoyed her second drink even more than the first one. Soon she would be having dinner, and then there would be a film. She had never felt happier in her life.

	Guerrero calculated that they were flying over the Detroit area. He was correct. There had been several useful announcements about the position and speed of the plane and, like every other passenger, he had a flight map. In about two and a half hours they would be flying over the coast of Newfoundland, and an hour after that would be the best time to pull the string and blow them all up.

	Now that the time was near, he wanted it to come quickly. He did not want to talk to anybody, especially not to that annoying old woman in the next seat. He just wanted to close his eyes and dream about all the money that would be coming to Inez and the children.

	He wondered if they would ever guess what he had done for them, and thank him for it. But there was one strange thing - he couldn't remember their faces any more. It was easier for him to imagine the money.

	Then he must have fallen asleep. When he woke up, a voice was saying: 'Are you ready for your dinner, sir? May I take your case?'



	CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN

	Mel Meets Elliott Freemantle

	As soon as Mel met Elliott Freemantle, the lawyer, he disliked him. Ten minutes later, he knew that he hated the man.

	It seemed that Freemantle was being as unpleasant as possible. He replied rudely to everything that Mel said. Mel soon realized that the lawyer was trying to make him lose his temper. He continued to speak calmly and politely to him, but he was finding it increasingly difficult.

	Freemantle claimed that he did not care that people's lives were being ruined by the noise from the airport.

	'We do care,' Mel told him. 'We know that there's a problem, and we're doing our best to solve it.'

	'Then your best is not good enough. And what have you done? You've just made a lot of empty promises, that's all.'

	'That's not true. We only use runway two five - which is the runway nearest to Meadowood - when we have to. The airport loses money by doing this. Perhaps you don't know this, but we've had many meetings with representatives of Meadowood before.'

	'Perhaps you didn't tell them the truth at all those other meetings. This meeting is going to be very different!'

	Mel decided not to answer. He saw that the reporters were writing busily, and knew that this was what Freemantle wanted. He felt sorry for Cindy, who had no interest at all in this matter.

	'You tell us that the runway nearest to Meadowood is not used,' Elliot continued, 'but it was certainly in use tonight.'

	'There's been a storm,' Mel said. 'I suppose that you've all noticed it? We had to use two five because three zero is blocked.'

	'We understand the reason, Mr Bakersfeld,' an older man said, 'but that doesn't help us. We still suffer from the noise. My name is Floyd Zanetta, and-'

	'Excuse me,' Elliott Freemantle interrupted. 'There's another point that I should like to make. We ought to tell you that we intend to take this airport to court, and we intend to win our case. Your airport, Mr Bakersfeld, is going to be closed down.'

	Of course Elliott knew that this would never happen. He was speaking well tonight, though. He wished that he could be heard by a larger group of people.

	'You are free to try anything you like,' Mel said, 'but I don't believe that any court would close down this airport.'

	'Oh? I didn't know that you were a lawyer! '

	'I'm not, as I'm sure you know.'

	'Well, I am a lawyer, you see,' Elliott Freemantle said, 'and I can tell you that there have been many cases like this. The airports have lost them.'

	He named several cases. Mel felt rather amused. He knew all about them, and understood that the situations had been very different from this one. There were many other cases which the airports had won, but of course Elliott did not mention them.

	Mel decided that the lawyer had said enough, and that it was time for him to speak. 'Since we are all here, there are some things I would like to say to you on the subject of airports and noise generally' he said.

	'That won't be necessary'

	'Really, Mr Freemantle? I've listened to everything you've had to say. Don't you think you ought to listen to me now? I'm sure the press will be interested in this.'

	'I think we ought-' Zanetta started to say.

	'Let Mr Freemantle answer me,' Mel said sharply.

	'There's no need to shout or to be rude,' Elliott said, smiling.

	'Oh? Then why have you been doing both those things yourself?'

	'Are you losing your temper, Mr Bakersfeld?'

	'No,' Mel said. 'I know that you would like me to, but I'm not going to. I'm going to tell you all the facts about this situation.'

	He told them how difficult it was to reduce the noise that a huge plane makes when it takes off and lands. Planes were getting bigger and noisier all the time, too. There was no easy answer to the Meadowood problem. In the end, the people would probably have to move from there. The airport would pay them for the loss of their homes.

	'Yes! You will pay them!' Elliott Freemantle said, rising to his feet,' and sooner than you think. We'll see you in court.' He went out, and the others followed him quietly.

	'I'm sorry about that,' Mel told Cindy.

	'You should have married the airport, not me.'

	One of the reporters, a young man called Tomlinson, came back into the office.

	'Mr Bakersfeld, could I see you for a moment?'

	'What is it?' Mel asked. He felt terribly tired.

	'I thought you'd like to see this.'

	It was one of the papers that Elliott Freemantle had given to the people at the meeting to sign, in order to name him as their lawyer. Mel looked at Tomlinson.

	'How many people signed this?'

	'I'm not sure. Several hundred, I think.'

	Now Mel understood what Freemantle was trying to do.

	'Will you mention this in your story?'

	'Yes, but I don't know whether or not my paper will print it.'

	'Thanks for telling me about it.' He wished that he had known about the money earlier.

	'I'd like to talk to you about the airport, if you have time,' the reporter said.

	'Certainly,' Mel replied, 'but not just now. At the moment there are lots of problems all demanding my attention. I hope we'll have a chance to talk later tonight.'



	CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT

	The Search for Inez

	As Tomlinson left Mel's office, Cindy stood up.

	'You have lots of problems demanding your attention,' she said bitterly, 'and I'm sure they're all more important to you than your wife.'

	'Cindy, I really do have to work.'

	'Yes, but you love it, don't you? You love your work much more than you love me or the children or a good social life.'

	'Why are we fighting? We don't have to fight any more.'

	'No,' Cindy said. 'I suppose not.'

	There was a silence.

	'Are you quite sure about the divorce?' Mel asked. 'If you have any doubts-'

	'I haven't, and neither have you really.'

	'That's true.'

	She almost started to tell him about Lionel, but then decided that it would be better to keep it a secret.

	There was a light knock at the door.

	'Again!' Cindy exclaimed.

	Tanya Livingston came in. 'Mel, I need some advice-' she began. Then she saw Cindy, and stopped. 'Excuse me. I thought you were alone.'

	'He will be very soon,' Cindy said, looking hard at Tanya, Tanya went red. 'I'm sorry, Mrs Bakersfeld. I didn't mean to interrupt you.'

	'I'm sure that it's time we were interrupted,' Cindy went on looking at Mel. 'After all, it must be at least two minutes since someone came in.' She turned to Tanya. 'How do you know my name? And who are you?'

	'I'm sorry,' Mel said. 'I should have introduced you to one another.'

	He knew that Cindy was wondering about his relationship with Tanya. She was looking at Tanya in a strange way. Had she already guessed that they planned to meet later that night? It didn't matter what she thought, though, now that they had decided to get divorced.

	'How nice that attractive ladies come to ask you for your advice,' Cindy said sweetly. 'It must make your job so much more interesting.' She turned to Tanya. 'Now, what exactly was your problem?'

	'I said that I wanted some advice.'

	'Oh really? What kind of advice? Professional or personal?'

	'Stop it, Cindy!' Mel said sharply. 'That's enough! You have no right to behave like this!'

	Tanya looked at Cindy calmly. 'It's about Flight Two. That's a flight to Rome, Mrs Bakersfeld.'

	'What's wrong?' Mel asked.

	Tanya told him about the thin man with a small case, and her conversation with the Customs Officer, Standish.

	'It sounds like a job for Italian Customs, not us,' he said.

	They had both forgotten that Cindy was there.

	'I'm not sure. I've checked on this man, and I've discovered something strange about him. He's flying to Rome without any luggage.'

	'Flying to Rome without any luggage! That's mad! Why would he do that?'

	'I don't know,' Tanya admitted, 'well - it may sound stupid, but...'

	'Go on. What are you trying to suggest?'

	'Perhaps he doesn't need any luggage because he knows that the flight will never arrive. If there's a bomb in the case-'

	A bomb. Mel wondered what he should do. It could be all imagination and yet - what if it was true? He did not want to look a fool, but on the other hand . . . Then he thought of one thing that he could check.

	He phoned the insurance desk, and asked the girl for the names of all the people who had bought flight insurance policies that evening.

	While he was waiting for the girl to find the names, he asked Tanya: 'Did you get the name of the man with no luggage?'

	'Yes, his name's Guerrero. D. O. Guerrero.'

	The same name as that woman Ned Ordway had brought to his office! Could there be some connection?

	'Tanya,' he said, 'there was a middle-aged woman waiting outside my office earlier this evening. I didn't have time to see her, and she left. Try and find her now. Her name is Inez Guerrero.'

	Tanya went off to make the announcement that he hoped Inez Guerrero would hear. It would be heard all over the terminal.

	The girl from the insurance desk came back to the telephone with the information that Mel needed. Now he knew exactly how important it was to find Inez.

	They must find her. If only he had had time to talk to her earlier! But there had been the Meadowood meeting, and Keith to worry about - Mel remembered he had considered going back to the control tower. Then there had been Cindy. He looked around and realized that Cindy had gone. He had not even noticed her leaving.

	He phoned Ordway. Now every policeman in the airport would be looking for Inez Guerrero.

	Tanya came back. 'Have you discovered anything new about our man?' she asked.

	Mel answered her slowly and quietly. 'Yes, I have. Guerrero, the man who is going to Rome without any luggage, insured his life this evening for three hundred thousand dollars. In the event of his death, the money would go to Inez Guerrero. He bought the policy with his last few coins.'

	Tanya turned white. 'Oh no!' she whispered. 'Oh God, no!'



	CHAPTER TWENTY NINE

	The Plane on the Runway

	Patroni was glad that he worked out on the airfield, and not in an office. He saw the office workers and managers as children who played games against one another. On the other hand, he saw the engineers and maintenance men as adults who shared their skills and worked together.

	This was being proved to him tonight. He had begun the job of digging under the Aereo-Mexican plane with a small group of Aereo-Mexican and TWA workers. Now they were being helped by others from Braniff and Pan Am who had come without being asked. That made Patroni feel good.

	In spite of the additional help, this job was taking longer than he had expected. The digging was progressing slowly, because the men had to stop very often to warm themselves. It was bitterly cold. When they had finished it would be the pilot's responsibility to drive the plane forwards, out of the wet ground.

	Patroni had been digging too. He enjoyed sharing the work done by his team of men. Now he stopped and said: 'We'll be finished in five minutes. I'll go and talk to the pilot.'

	The Mexican pilot was listening to music inside the plane. It was warm and comfortable in there. As Patroni came in, he turned the radio off.

	'Don't worry,' Patroni said. 'Enjoy the music. We didn't really expect you to come and help us with our work.'

	'I have my job to do. You have yours,' the captain said, in his correct but rather stiff English.

	'Sure, but we all want to get this plane out of the mud. Would you like me to drive it out?'

	'No thank you,' the captain said coldly.

	'It will be very difficult, and I've done it before.'

	'Mr Patroni, I know who you are. I am sure that you are very good at your job. But I am the captain of this plane, and I shall remain in control of it!'

	'All right. But when I tell you to, make sure that you give the engines full power - and I mean full power!'

	Patroni left the captain. Outside the digging had stopped. They were ready to move the plane.

	'Ready to start! '

	There was a sudden burst of noise as engine number three started.

	'Clear to start four!'

	The maintenance men were running out of the way of the plane.

	'Clear to start two!'

	'Clear to start one!'

	Patroni was on the telephone to the captain. 'Let's get moving! More power!' he shouted, as the engines and the plane shook.

	The engine noise grew, and then suddenly died.

	'It cannot be done,' the captain said. 'If I give the engines more power, the plane will stand on its nose. Instead of a stuck plane we shall have a damaged one.'

	'It can be done! It can, if you have the courage to try!'

	'You may try now, if you like. Let us see what your courage can do. Will you accept full responsibility for this plane?'

	'Yes!'

	'Good night, then.'

	As the pilot left, Patroni examined the ground beneath the plane. As he had feared, the plane was now deeper in the mud than before.

	They would have to start the whole operation again a hard job to ask tired men to do. Patroni knew that he could move the plane. This time, he would take the controls.



	CHAPTER THIRTY

	Inez Loses Hope

	Inez Guerrero could no longer remember where she was or why she was there. Her troubles were too great for her to bear, and her tired brain refused to think any more.

	The taxi-driver who had brought her to the airport had added to her pain. She had paid him with her last ten dollars, and expected him to give her some change. He said that he had none, but that he would go and get some. Inez wasted time by waiting for him. He never returned, and he had taken the last of her money.

	If she had not waited for the change, she might have reached Gate 47 before Flight Two left. But she had been too late. She learned from the agent at the gate that D. O. Guerrero had left on Flight Two.

	Now she was completely alone and without money. She began to cry. At first the tears came slowly. Then, as she thought of all her troubles, she began to cry noisily. She cried for the past and for the present, for what she had had and what she had lost. She cried for her home and children, and for her husband who had now left her. She cried because her shoes hurt her feet, because her clothes were wet, and because she felt old and tired and ill. She cried for herself and for everyone else who was poor and who lived without hope.

	People began to give her strange looks, so she wandered away, without knowing where to go. Soon after, a policeman found her and took her to Mel's office. She did not understand where she was being taken, but she went quietly.

	She sat there for a while, but then she wandered away again. Once, she thought she heard her name in an announcement, but she knew that she must be dreaming. Nobody at the airport could possibly know her name.



	CHAPTER THIRTY ONE

	Danger for the Golden Argosy

	Several people were hurrying towards Mel's office as quickly as they could. Mel and Tanya had made some phone calls, and they had made it clear that speed was all important.

	Bert Weatherby, the Transport Manager of TWA and Tanya's boss, arrived first, followed by Ned Ordway.

	'What's this all about?' Weatherby asked.

	'We're not sure, but we think there may be a bomb on board the Rome flight.'

	Weatherby looked hard at Tanya, but he said nothing. Mel told the two men all that he and Tanya knew. While he was explaining the situation Harry Standish came in with Bunnie Vorobioff, the girl who had sold the insurance policy to Guerrero. As she listened to what Mel was saying, she began to look pale and frightened.

	'What we have to decide,' Mel told them all, 'is whether we should warn the captain of Flight Two, and if so, what we should tell him.' The captain of Flight Two was Vernon Demerest, he remembered.

	The telephone rang. There was more information for them about Flight Two, giving them the present position of the plane, and its height, speed and course. There was some news from Joe Patroni, too. Runway three zero would be out of use for at least one more hour.

	Weatherby asked: 'That woman - the passenger's wife. What's her name?'

	'Inez Guerrero,' Ordway told him.

	'Where is she?'

	'We don't know. My men are looking for her now.'

	'She was here,' Mel said. 'We had no idea-'

	'We were all slow,' Weatherby said.

	Tanya knew that he was remembering that he had told her to 'forget it!' when she had tried to talk to him about Guerrero.

	'Perhaps we should send a description of Guerrero to the captain,' she suggested.

	'Yes,' Mel agreed. 'We have someone here who has seen him and can describe him.'

	He turned to Bunnie. 'Are you Miss Vorobioff?'

	All the men turned to look at her. Weatherby almost whistled, but he managed to stop himself just in time.

	'Do you remember the man we are talking about?'

	'I - I'm not sure,' she said nervously.

	'A man called D. O. Guerrero. You sold him an insurance policy, didn't you?'

	'Yes.'

	'So you can tell us what he looks like.'

	'No -I can't.'

	Mel looked surprised. 'But I thought you said earlier that you could!'

	'I'm sorry. I don't remember now.'

	Ned Ordway stepped towards Bunnie. 'Listen,' he said. 'I know that you can describe this man. You're frightened, aren't you? You think that it will get you into trouble?'

	Bunnie did not answer.

	Ordway's voice was hard as he went on. 'You'll be in really big trouble if you refuse to tell us what you know. Now, I'll ask you once more. Do you remember Guerrero?'

	'Yes,' she said quietly.

	'Describe him.'

	'A thin man with nervous hands. A pale yellowish face and thin lips. He had no Italian money, and had to search his pockets before he found enough coins to pay for his insurance policy.'

	'And you sold him one!' Weatherby cried. 'You must be mad!'

	'I thought-'

	'You thought! But what did you do? Nothing! Oh, we're all mad to allow you to sell insurance at an airport.'

	Mel turned to Standish. 'Would you like to say anything?'

	'Just this. If this man has a bomb in his case, he must be able to reach it easily. If anyone is going to try to take the case from him, it will have to be done very carefully.'

	'Of course,' Mel said, 'there may be no bomb. He may be just an ordinary passenger.'

	'I don't think so. I wish I did, because my favourite little girl is on that flight.'

	If only I had acted earlier! Standish was thinking. How will I tell Judy's parents if anything happens to her?

	'As a Customs man, I'm used to watching people,' he went on. 'Let me say something about Guerrero. I'm sure that he's a dangerous man. Put that word in your message to the captain - dangerous.'

	As the message was being prepared and sent, Ordway received some news from his men. They had found Inez Guerrero.

	She had been sitting quietly in a corner when she heard someone ask: 'Inez Guerrero? Are you Mrs Inez Guerrero?'

	She looked up and saw a policeman. A different policeman from last time.

	'Are you Mrs Guerrero?'

	'Yes,' she whispered.

	'Come on. The whole airport's looking for you.' Ten minutes later she was sitting in Mel's office, surrounded by people.

	'Mrs Guerrero,' Ordway asked, 'why is your husband going to Rome?'

	She did not answer.

	'Please listen to me carefully. We need your help. I have to ask you some questions about your husband. Will you answer them?'

	'Come on!' Weatherby said impatiently. 'This is wasting time. Get rough with her if you have to!'

	'Leave it to me, Mr Weatherby' Ordway said calmly, 'Shouting won't make this any quicker.'

	'Inez,' he continued. 'May I call you Inez?'

	'Yes,' she whispered. 'Inez, will you answer my questions?'

	'Yes - if I can.'

	'Why is your husband going to Rome?' He could hardly hear her answer.

	'I don't know.'

	'Have you got any friends there?'

	'No.'

	'What is your husband's job?'

	'He was a builder.'

	'Was? Isn't he now?'

	'Things went - wrong.'

	'Is he in trouble?'

	'Yes.'

	'In debt?'

	'Yes.'

	'Then how did he pay for his ticket?'

	She told Ordway about the ring that D. O. had sold.

	'Did you agree to this?'

	'No! I didn't know what he was doing.'

	'I believe you, Inez. Did your husband often do strange things without telling you?'

	'Yes.'

	'Was he ever violent?'

	'Yes,' she whispered. 'Please, why do you want to know all this?'

	'Did he ever use explosives?'

	'Yes - he liked using them.'

	Everyone in the room was suddenly silent.

	'Where do you live?'

	She gave them her address.

	'And where did he keep the explosives?'

	'In a drawer in the bedroom.' A sudden look of shock crossed her face.

	Ordway saw it. 'You thought of something then! What was it?'

	'Nothing.'

	'That's not true! Tell me, Inez, what was it?' Ordway had stopped being gentle and polite. Now he was shouting 'Tell me! Tell me!' at her.

	'Tonight - the explosives - I didn't think of it before.'

	'Yes! Go on!'

	'They had gone.'

	Nobody spoke.

	'Did you know that your husband was going to insure his life heavily?'

	'No - no-'

	'I believe you. Now listen to me carefully. We think that your husband intends to use those explosives to blow up the plane he is on. He is heavily insured, and the money would come to you. The explosion would kill everyone on the plane - including children. Inez, you know your husband. Could he do a thing like that?'

	Tears poured down her face. She could hardly speak. 'Yes,' she cried. 'Yes, I think he could.'



	CHAPTER THIRTY TWO

	Vernon's Plan

	On board the Golden Argosy Captains Harris and Demerest were enjoying a good meal. They had exactly the same to eat as the first-class passengers, but without the wine, of course.

	Suddenly, their meal was interrupted as a radio message came through. While Vernon wrote it down, his face changed. He passed it to Harris and Jordan.

	There was only one sensible thing to do - turn in a wide circle that the passengers would not notice, and return to Lincoln International. Harris began to do this immediately. Vernon sent for Gwen.

	'What do you want?' she asked as she came in. 'If it's more to eat, I'll have to say no!'

	'We want you to look for a passenger,' Vernon told her. 'Look, you'd better read this message.'

	As she stood by him reading, he watched her face. She looked serious, but not frightened. He remembered that she had told him that she loved him. He wondered whether he himself had ever really loved anybody. Perhaps what he felt for Gwen was the nearest that he would ever come to love.

	For a moment he felt angry about the change in plans. They would not get to Naples now as quickly as he would have liked to. A second later he was the complete professional pilot once again, with thoughts only for his plane and his passengers.

	'Find this man, Gwen,' he told her. 'See how easy it would be to get the case from him.'

	'I've already noticed him,' she said quietly. 'I don't need to look again. He wouldn't let me touch his case when I took him his dinner. Another reason I remember him is that he's sitting next to our old lady stowaway. He's between her and the window.'

	'That will make it difficult for us to get the case away from him.'

	For the first time Vernon began to feel that they were in danger.

	'If only we could think of some trick,' he said slowly. 'Did you say that he's next to our little old stowaway?'

	'Yes.'

	'And she doesn't yet know that we know who she is?'

	'That's right.'

	'Listen. I have an idea. It may work.'

	***

	Mrs Quonsett was just finishing her meal. 'That was very nice, my dear,' she said to the girl who had come to clear the empty meal containers.

	Then she noticed another girl standing by her. She had black hair, an intelligent face, and strong, dark eyes. Mrs Quonsett had noticed her earlier.

	'Excuse me. May I see your ticket?'

	'Why, of course,' Mrs Quonsett said. She knew what was happening, but she never gave up without a fight.

	She pretended to search her handbag. 'How strange! I simply can't seem to find my ticket!'

	'Shall I look?' Gwen said coldly. 'If you have a ticket, I'm sure I'll find it.'

	'Certainly not! My handbag is private. I shall find the ticket myself. You're English, aren't you?' she went on. 'How beautiful you make our language sound. My husband always used to say-'

	'Never mind about him. I want your ticket.' It was hard for Gwen to be so rude and unpleasant to an old woman, but Vernon had told her exactly what she had to do.

	'I'm trying to be patient with you, my dear, but I really shall have to complain.'

	'Will you, Mrs Quonsett? You see, I know all about you. This isn't the first plane you've got on without a ticket, is it?'

	'If you know all about me already, there's nothing more I can say.'

	'What's wrong?' Mrs Quonsett's musician friend asked, 'Perhaps I can help.'

	'Are you travelling with this lady?'

	'No.'

	'Then this does not concern you.'

	'Are we going back to the airport?' Mrs Quonsett asked.

	'You're not important enough for that. We'll deal with you in Rome.'

	Gwen hoped that Guerrero was listening. She looked at him quickly, and felt a sudden icy fear.

	'Come with me,' she said to the old lady. 'The captain wants to speak to you, and he doesn't like to be kept waiting.'

	Mrs Quonsett was feeling rather frightened of the captain, so she was very surprised when he said 'Hello!' to her in a friendly voice.

	'Forget what happened just then,' he told her. 'I ordered Miss Meighen to be rude to you. That isn't the reason I want to speak to you.'

	Mrs Quonsett looked around. How exciting to see how a plane was flown! It would be another adventure to tell her daughter about.

	'Do you get frightened easily?' the captain asked her.

	What a strange question! 'No,' she said. 'When you are as old as I am, there isn't much left to be frightened of.'

	'We need your help, Mrs Quonsett,' he told her. 'I suppose you've noticed the man sitting between you and the window?'

	'Yes. He won't talk to anyone. I think he's worried about something.'

	'We're worried, too. We think that he has a bomb in his case.'

	This was exciting, but a bit frightening, too.

	'I suppose you want me to try and take the case away from him,' she said.

	'No! Don't touch the case. That would be very dangerous for us all. Now listen...'

	When he had finished telling her his plan, she smiled. 'Oh yes, I think I can do that,' she said.

	'Why do you keep flying to New York as a stowaway? 'Vernon asked her. She told him all about her daughter in New York, and how lonely she sometimes felt in San Diego.

	'If you can help us now,' he said, 'I promise we'll give you a free ticket to New York and back, first class.'

	Mrs Quonsett's eyes filled with tears. How kind! What a dear, wonderful man!

	***

	Mrs Quonsett really was crying as Gwen pushed her roughly back towards her seat. 'What a good actress I'm becoming!' she thought happily.

	'Couldn't you be less rough?' one passenger asked Gwen.

	'Keep out of this, sir,' she replied, knowing that Guerrero could hear her. Again, she felt a wave of fear at the thought of him.

	As Mrs Quonsett's friendly neighbour stood up to let her sit down, Gwen stood between him and his seat. Vernon was waiting behind the curtain between the first-class and tourist areas, ready to come in when his help was needed.

	Still standing, Mrs Quonsett began to beg Gwen: 'Please, ask the captain to change his mind! I don't want to go to prison!'

	'I don't give orders to the captain!' Gwen shouted. 'Now sit down!'

	Ada Quonsett began to cry noisily. 'Please take me home! Don't leave me in a strange country!'

	'How can you be so cruel to this old lady?' the musician complained to Gwen.

	Gwen took no notice of him, but gave the old woman a hard push, so that she fell into her seat. 'You hurt me!' she cried. She turned to D. O. Guerrero. 'Help me! Help me!' He took no notice of her.

	Crying and shouting, she threw her arms around his neck. He struggled with her, fighting to free himself, but she wound her arms around his neck more tightly. 'Oh, help me!'

	Red-faced and breathless, D. O. Guerrero put up both hands to push her away. As if to beg him for help, she seized them. In a second Gwen had reached over and taken the case from him. It had all been surprisingly easy.

	Vernon hurried in. 'Well done, Gwen. Let me take the case.'

	That should have been the end of the whole affair. But it was not - and all because of a man called Marcus Rathbone.

	He was an unpleasant man who always liked to criticize other people's ideas, although he had never had a good idea of his own in his life. He was especially critical of women. When he saw a woman in uniform take a man's case from him, he knew that he had to help that man. He seized the case from Gwen, and handed it politely back to Guerrero.

	Like a wild animal, with madness in his eyes, Guerrero took it and held it tightly to him.

	Vernon ran forwards, but he was too late. Gwen, Rathbone and the musician were in his way, and he could not reach Guerrero before he had pushed past them and was rushing down the plane.

	'Stop that man!' Vernon shouted. 'He has a bomb!'

	Everywhere, passengers were jumping to their feet, shouting.

	Guerrero stopped with his back to the toilets. 'Stay away from me!' he shouted.

	'Guerrero, listen to me! 'Vernon called to him over the heads of the others. 'Do you hear me? Listen!'

	There was silence as Guerrero looked back at him, his eyes wild.

	'We know who you are,' Vernon went on, 'and we know what you're trying to do. We know all about the insurance and the bomb, and they know about it back at the airport, too. That means that the insurance is no good. Do you understand? It's worth nothing. If you die, you'll die for nothing and your family will get nothing. Worse than that, they'll be blamed and made to suffer. Think of that, Guerrero.'

	A woman cried out. Guerrero paused.

	Vernon knew that he had to keep talking, and hope that Guerrero would listen to what he had to say.

	'Guerrero, let's all sit down. I'd like to talk to you. Nobody on this plane's going to hurt you, I promise.'

	Gwen was closest to Guerrero.

	'Try to get into a seat, 'Vernon whispered to Gwen. 'I may have to move quickly'

	A man came out of one of the toilets behind Guerrero. At the sound of the door opening, Guerrero turned.

	'Get the man with the case! He's got a bomb!' somebody shouted.

	Guerrero pushed past the man and ran into the toilet. Gwen had run after him, and she stuck her foot in the door as he tried to close it.

	Guerrero had not really understood everything that had happened in the last few minutes, but he understood that, like so many other things in his life, his great plan had failed. His life had been a failure, and now his death would be a failure too.

	As he pulled the string, he wondered bitterly whether the bomb would be another failure. In the last second of his life he learned that it was not.



	CHAPTER THIRTY THREE

	Emergency in the Air

	The explosion on board Flight Two was immediate. Inside the plane there was a sudden noise like thunder, or a blow from a great hammer. A sheet of flame shot along the length of the plane.

	D. O. Guerrero died at once. His body was near the centre of the explosion, and was completely destroyed. One moment he existed; the next moment only a few small bloody pieces of flesh remained.

	A large hole appeared in the side of the plane.

	Gwen Meighen was nearest to Guerrero, and received the force of the explosion in her face and chest.

	The hole in the side of the plane caused an immediate change in the air pressure. A dark, terrible cloud of dust rolled through the plane, carrying newspapers, bottles and bags towards the hole. Curtains and doors were torn off and thrown about the plane, hitting several people and adding to the confusion. Passengers held onto their seats to avoid being sucked out of the plane. Oxygen lines fell down on them from the emergency containers above their heads.

	Suddenly the sucking stopped. The plane filled with mist, and a freezing, deadly cold. The noise from the engines and the wind was unbelievably loud.

	Vernon Demerest had held onto a seat, seized an oxygen line and shouted: 'Get on oxygen!' to the passengers. He knew that after only ten seconds without enough oxygen, their lives would be in danger.

	He had to get back to Harris and Jordan to tell them what had happened. Breathing deeply, he moved from one oxygen line to the next. As he went, he noticed a young girl helping the people next to her connect an oxygen line to their baby. He found out later that this was Judy, and Standish was her uncle.

	Vernon had no time to think of Gwen. He did not even know whether she was alive or dead. Before he could reach Harris, the plane suddenly began dropping fast.

	***

	Harris and Jordan did not know exactly what had happened, but they had felt the shock of the explosion, and the pressure change which followed it. The door to the pilots' area was torn off and a thick cloud of dust rushed in. As in the passenger part of the plane, this had been replaced by a fine mist and a terrible cold.

	Harris acted quickly, using all his skill and experience in his fight to save the plane. Fortunately, like all pilots, he had practised dealing with emergencies so often that when a real emergency came, he acted with the greatest speed.

	It was a rule of aviation that, in an emergency, airline employees must take care of themselves before they began to think about the passengers. Harris reached for an oxygen line immediately, and a moment later Cy Jordan pressed the button that gave the passengers the oxygen they needed.

	Harris reduced the speed of the plane. Now he had a decision to make. It was necessary to take the plane down to a safer height where they could breathe without the help of oxygen. The question was, should he bring the plane down slowly, or in a rapid fall?

	If the plane was badly damaged, a sudden fall could break it in two. But if they went down slowly, there was a chance that the passengers would die of the cold. What could they do? Freeze for certain, or take a risk and go down fast?

	'Warn Air Traffic Control,' Harris told Jordan. 'We're coming down fast.'

	He pushed the controls forward. 'We are coming down fast,' he heard Jordan say. 'Request 10,000 feet.'

	They were falling rapidly. Passing through 26,000 feet -24-23. There was no other traffic near them. No time to think about the cold. They would live - if they could get low enough fast enough - if the plane did not break up. At fourteen thousand feet, Harris decided, he would pull out of the fall, and level at ten.

	The controls were stiff and heavy, but everything seemed to be working. They were coming out of the fall. Eleven thousand feet - ten five - ten. They were level. The plane had not broken up. He had made the right decision.

	Now they needed information from Toronto. Where could they land - at Detroit, Toronto or Lincoln International?

	Vernon Demerest came in.

	'We missed you,' Harris said.

	'How're we doing?'

	'If the tail doesn't fall off, we may be all right. What happened?'

	'Oh, just a little bomb that made a big hole in our nice plane.'

	They did not want to talk about the real dangers of the situation.

	'It was a good idea, Vernon,' Harris said kindly. 'It could have worked.'

	'Yes, but it didn't.'

	Vernon told Jordan to go and see how bad the damage was.

	'Count the people who are hurt and do what you can to help them,' he said. 'And find out how badly hurt Gwen is.' It was the first time that he had allowed himself to think about her.

	Toronto Air Traffic Control Centre reported that Detroit and Toronto airports were closed, but Lincoln was still open. Carrying the large amount of fuel that they were, landing anywhere would be difficult. They needed the longest runway that they could get. That was at Lincoln - an hour's flying time away. The question was, could the plane stay in the air for another hour?

	Jordan reported on the damage. He thought that the plane would be able to reach Lincoln, but he was not so sure about the passengers. There were several doctors working among them.

	'What about Gwen?' Vernon asked, afraid as he spoke of what the answer might be. The news was not encouraging. She was more badly hurt than anyone else.

	'We'll land at Lincoln,' Captain Harris decided.

	Runway three zero was the one that they wanted. It was still blocked by the Aereo-Mexican plane.

	'They have 50 minutes to clear it for us, 'Vernon said roughly. 'They'll have to clear it. It's our only chance.'



	CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR

	The People from Meadowood

	Elliott Freemantle could not understand it. A large number of people from the Meadowood meeting had followed him to the airport, and were at the moment making a great deal of noise in the main hall of the terminal. Television cameras had arrived, but there were no policemen! Elliott wanted the police to arrive. Then there would be trouble - and a big story for the press.

	All the time he was talking to the television reporters, he was waiting for the police to arrive.

	'Why are you here?' a reporter asked him.

	'Because this airport is full of thieves and liars.'

	'That's strong talk. Will you explain exactly what you mean by it?'

	'Certainly. The peace, the rest and the good health of these people are being stolen from them by this airport. Nobody cares how much they suffer. Only this evening the airport manager told them that the noise will get worse, not better! He didn't care.'

	'What are you going to do about this?'

	'We're going to take the airport to court - to the highest court in the land, if necessary. We shall begin by asking for some runways - if not the whole airport - to be closed at night. I care about these people! I shall fight for them, and I shall win!'

	The crowd was growing bigger all the time, Elliott noticed, and people were growing angrier too. When he had finished speaking, a man shouted: 'Let's show the airport how loud a noise can be!' and a great shout rose from the throats of the crowd. If the police came now, the press would certainly write about the meeting.

	What Elliott Freemantle did not know was that every policeman in the airport was looking for Inez Guerrero. Even after she had been found, Ordway, the police chief, was busy talking to her in Mel's office. When he had finished, he and Mel left the office together.

	Immediately they saw Elliott Freemantle surrounded by a crowd of people and cameras.

	'That lawyer again!' Ordway said. 'I'll soon get rid of him!'

	'Be careful,' Mel said. 'He wants attention from the press. We don't want to help him.'

	As Ordway went to speak to the lawyer, Mel saw Tomlinson, the young reporter he had met earlier that evening. He asked him what Elliott had been saying, and when he found out his face darkened with anger.

	'Freemantle!' he shouted, 'I'm interested in what you've been saying this evening. Do these people know that it's all lies?'

	Everyone was silent. They turned to look at Mel.

	'Don't listen to him!' Elliott shouted.

	'I think that the press should hear what I have to say,' Mel said. 'I'm the airport manager. Mr Freemantle has told you that I don't care how much these people are suffering. Now I'd like to answer that criticism.'

	'He'll tell you more lies!'

	'You be quiet!' Ned Ordway told Elliott. 'You've spoken already. Now listen!'

	Mel spoke for the second time that evening about how they tried to reduce noise at the airport, and how the storm had made it necessary to use the runway nearest to Meadowood. Again he said that planes were becoming bigger and noisier all the time.

	'I do care about your problem,' he went on, 'but I must remind you of something. You won't like listening to this, but it's true.'

	Twelve years ago, the land where their houses now stood had been empty. Building companies had been told not to use it for houses, but some of them had been too interested in money to take any notice of the warnings. They had built houses and sold them to people without telling them that the noise from planes would be getting worse and worse. These builders, and not the airport, were to blame for the present problem.

	Nobody spoke. Mel felt very sorry for the people who had bought houses in Meadowood. They were just ordinary people, and he wished that he could help them.

	'Now,' he said, 'there are some lawyers who are making a lot of money for themselves out of people with the same problem as you have. They're cheating you.'

	'That isn't true! He's lying!' Elliott shouted, but the crowd seemed to want to listen to Mel.

	He told them that they had very little chance of winning their case against the airport. People had won, it was true, but those cases had been very different. He told them about some other cases which had failed.

	Now the anger of the crowd turned against Elliott Freemantle.

	'How can we get our money back?' they began to ask. 'We were fools to sign anything too quickly.'

	'Write to Mr Freemantle immediately,' Mel told them. 'Tell him that you've changed your mind. I don't think that you'll hear from him again.'

	Elliott knew it was the end. He never went on fighting when he knew that he had no chance of winning. Ah well, he would soon find some more fools in another town, he was sure.

	As the Meadowood people went sadly and quietly home, a woman came up to Mel.

	'Thank you for talking to us and for telling us the truth,' she said, 'but I still don't know what I can tell my children when they can't sleep because of the noise.'

	Mel knew that there was nothing he could say to her. That was the saddest thing about the whole affair.

	As he was wondering what to say, Tanya handed him a piece of paper. From it he learned of the explosion on board the Golden Argosy. The plane would have to land at Lincoln International on runway three zero. And runway three zero was still blocked.



	CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE

	Return to Lincoln Airport

	Doctor Milton Compagno was doing his best to save Gwen Meighen's life.

	She had been near to the centre of the explosion. Two things - the toilet door and Guerrero's body - had been between her and the full force of the explosion, and they had saved her life.

	Now she lay on the floor, unconscious and bleeding. Some of the passengers were also bleeding from cuts, but they were not seriously hurt in comparison with Gwen.

	It was fortunate that as she fell her arm had fallen around the base of a seat. If this had not happened, she might have been sucked out of the hole in the side of the plane.

	The next great danger was from lack of oxygen. Some people managed to get to the oxygen quickly and then help others, as Vernon had seen Judy do. Mrs Quonsett, too, had helped her musician friend to get oxygen. She did not really care whether she lived or died - as long as she knew what was happening until the last moment!

	Gwen received no oxygen. When Anson Harris put the plane into a fall, he saved her from certain death from lack of oxygen.

	After the plane levelled out again, everyone began to think they might be over the worst. The three doctors who were travelling on the flight started to do what they could to help those who had been hurt.

	It was lucky for Gwen that there was a man like Compagno on board. He seemed to enjoy helping people, and since he had become a doctor he had never stopped working. Of the three doctors on the plane he was the only one who had a medical bag with him.

	He directed the other doctors to look after the passengers, and to move those who had been hurt to the front of the plane, where it was warmer. Then he asked one of the air hostesses to help him, and gave Gwen some oxygen. He cleared blood and broken teeth from her mouth, and began to control the bleeding from her face and chest. One arm was broken, but what worried him most was the damage to her left eye.

	When Cy Jordan came to see how Gwen was, Compagno asked him to help for a few minutes before he told him: 'She has a good chance, if she's a strong girl.'

	'I think she's strong,' Jordan said.

	'She was a pretty girl, wasn't she?'

	'Very.'

	Compagno was silent. She would not be pretty any more.

	Looking a little sicker than before, Jordan went forward to the pilots' area.

	Vernon Demerest made an announcement to the passengers. 'As you know,' he said, 'we're in trouble - bad trouble. But we're still alive, and we hope to make a safe landing at Lincoln International in about 45 minutes. It will be a difficult landing, so you must all help us by doing exactly what we tell you to do. Let's try and come through this together - safely'

	'That was good,' Harris said. 'You ought to be in politics!'

	'Nobody would vote for me. They don't like to hear the truth. It hurts them too much.' He was thinking about the matter of the sale of flight insurance at the airport, and wondering how Mel Bakersfeld would feel about it after what had happened tonight. He didn't suppose that Mel would ever change his closed little mind. Well, if he lived through this, Vernon would continue to fight him with all his strength!

	A radio message came through. Lincoln's runway three zero was still out of use, but they were trying to clear it. Vernon's face showed clearly what he thought of that!

	He sent Jordan back to talk to the passengers and make sure that they knew what to do before the landing. As Jordan left, Doctor Compagno came in.

	'Your Miss Meighen is the most badly hurt,' he told Vernon. 'Can you radio for a doctor to be waiting for her at the airport? Her left eye will need immediate treatment.'

	Vernon went pale with shock as the doctor described her wounds. He felt sick.

	'I'd better go back to her now,' Compagno said.

	'Don't go!'

	Compagno looked surprised.

	'Gwen - Miss Meighen - she was - is - going to have a baby. Does it make any-difference?'

	'I didn't know that, but, no, it won't make any difference. If she lives, the baby should be all right.'

	There was a silence until Harris said: 'Vernon, could you fly for a bit? I'd like to rest before I make the landing.'

	Vernon was glad to have something to do. He was also glad that Harris had not asked any questions about Gwen.

	He could not stop thinking about her. She had been so beautiful, and she had told him that she loved him. Now she had only 'a good chance' of living. She might never see Naples.

	Suddenly he knew that he loved her. There could be no question of giving the baby away or of her having an abortion now. She would have the baby, and he would take full responsibility for it.

	He remembered his daughter, the child he had never seen. Before her birth he had wanted to tell Sarah about her, and suggest that they should have her as part of their family, but he had not had the courage. Now he often wondered where she was and whether she was happy. He had even tried to find her, but it had not been possible.

	He would not suffer the same uncertainty again over this child. This time it would all be different. He would not lie to Sarah. Oh, there would be the most terrible trouble at home! There would be crying and shouting. But Sarah was a sensible woman, and he knew that she would not leave him. He would have two women and a baby to look after. What a terrible situation! But he was glad that he had made a decision.

	He began to think about the baby. Perhaps it would be rather lice to be a father! Not that he would want to have seven children like that old fool Harris! He laughed.

	'What are you laughing at?' Harris asked.

	'Laughing? Why should I be laughing? There must be something wrong with your ears, Anson. You should see a doctor about it.'

	'There's no need to be unpleasant,' Harris said.

	'Isn't there? I think that's exactly what we need in this situation - someone to be unpleasant!'

	'Well, if that's what we need, I'm sure you're the best man for the job.'

	Harris took control of the plane again. As he did so, Vernon sent a radio message to Toronto. Anson Harris was right - he was good at being unpleasant.

	'Are you listening there, or are you all asleep? Tell Lincoln we need runway three zero. Don't tell me it's still blocked; I've heard that before. If we land anywhere else, we'll have a broken plane full of dead people. So get me three zero, do you understand?'

	Then he added a special message for Mel Bakersfeld: 'You helped to get us into this situation, you stupid fool, by not listening to me about selling flight insurance at the airport. Now help us to get out of it. Wake up for once in your useless life, and get that runway clear!'



	CHAPTER THIRTY SIX

	The Runway Stays Blocked

	Through the radio in his fast-moving car, Mel could hear emergency vehicles being called out onto the airfield. They had to be there to deal with the possibility of fire, and to take the people who had been hurt off the plane.

	He received some information about Patroni. He hoped to be able to move the Aereo-Mexican plane in 20 minutes.

	Tanya and Tomlinson were with Mel in the car. The reporter had helped Mel earlier, by telling him what Elliott Freemantle was doing, and now Mel wanted to help him to get a good story.

	'Let me check something,' Tomlinson said. 'There's only one runway long enough for this plane to land safely on. Is that right?'

	'Yes,' Mel said. 'There should be two.' He had been trying for years to persuade the Airport Committee that another runway of that length was needed. They would not take any notice of him - for political reasons, as he well knew.

	'May I put all this in my story?' the reporter asked.

	Mel paused for a moment. 'Why not?' he said.

	'You've been speaking well tonight, if I may say so, 'Tomlinson went on. 'Just like you used to a few years ago.'

	Just like I used to, Mel thought. Not like I do now. People know that I've changed, that I've lost something.

	'You're talking about how you need more runways,' Tanya said, 'but I keep thinking about the people on that plane. I can't help wondering how they feel, and if they're frightened.'

	'They're frightened,' Mel said. 'If they understand what's happening, they must be frightened.' He remembered his own crash, long ago. As he thought of it, the pain in his foot returned.

	It was then that the first radio message from Vernon Demerest came through.

	'There's another message, Mr Bakersfeld, for you alone. It's rather personal. Do you want to hear it?'

	'Does it concern the present situation?'

	'Yes.'

	'Then read it.'

	They listened in silence. Vernon must have enjoyed sending that, Mel thought. He knew that people all over the airport would be able to hear it. In any case, the message was unnecessary. Mel had already decided what he had to do.

	He spoke to Danny Farrow. 'Send the snowploughs and heavy vehicles to the stuck plane. If Patroni can't drive the plane out very soon, we'll push it out. I'll give the order myself.'

	'All right,' Danny said, his voice tired. 'Mel, I suppose you know what those vehicles will do to a plane?'

	'They'll move it,' Mel replied sharply, 'and that's the most important thing.'

	'Move it!' Tomlinson exclaimed. 'They'll break it into little pieces! You'll break up a six million dollar plane!'

	'I know, but we may have to do it to save lives. I hope not.'

	Tanya reached for Mel's hand. 'You're doing the right thing,' she said. 'Remember that.'

	Mel got out of his car near the stuck plane, and spoke to a very cold and tired Joe Patroni. He told him what he planned to do.

	'Push an undamaged plane with snowploughs!' Patroni exploded. 'You're mad!'

	'We may have to do it, Joe.'

	'Listen, I'll drive it out in 15 minutes! Just give me a little more time.'

	'I will,' Mel said, 'but when Ground Control gives you the order to stop, you must stop.'

	The three of them sat in the car, waiting. Tomlinson was thinking about his story. 'Has what is happening made you change your ideas about flight insurance?' he asked Mel.

	'Couldn't you ask that question some other time?' Tanya said angrily, but Mel said: 'I'll answer it now. I may have to change my mind, but I don't know yet. I'm still thinking about it.'

	The minutes passed slowly. Now there was time for Tomlinson to ask all the questions about aviation that he had wanted to ask earlier. It helped to pass the time for Mel.

	Suddenly Tanya cried: 'Look! He's starting the engines!' The three of them fixed their eyes on the plane. It was not moving yet. There were six minutes left.

	The noise of the engines grew. 'He's using all the engines now,'

	Tanya said, 'but it isn't moving. Oh, I can't bear it!'

	No, Patroni could not move it. Mel was ready to give the order to bring in the snowploughs. They would have to push the plane off the runway.



	CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN

	Bringing Down Flight Two

	Usually Air Traffic Control was quiet after midnight, but tonight was different. Because of the storm, flights were arriving very late, and Wayne Tevis and Keith were still on duty.

	Keith was trying to think of his work and nothing but his work. In some strange way, his mind seemed to be working on two levels. On one level he directed the air traffic with something of his old skill; on the other level his thoughts were all about his personal problems. He felt that he had already left his family and friends for ever. He belonged now to the dead - to the Redfern family whose deaths he had caused. Soon he would be joining them ...

	Realization of what was happening on board Trans America Flight Two came to Keith gradually.

	Wayne Tevis had been told all about the emergency. He knew that Vernon Demerest had asked for runway three zero to be cleared, but there was a possibility that it would not be clear in time. If that happened, the plane would have to land on two five. Radio communication had been set up between the control tower and Joe Patroni on board the Aereo-Mexican plane.

	Tevis wondered if he should send Keith off duty, or at least ask him to move. Where he was working now, he would be the one to control the landing of Flight Two. He decided to leave Keith where he was, but to stay close to him in case he needed help.

	A number of radio messages made the situation clear to Keith. He heard Captain Demerest emphasize the importance of clearing three zero - or there would be 'a broken plane full of dead people'. He heard Vernon's message to Mel, too. He knew that Patroni was trying to move the plane, and that time was running out.

	As the time when Flight Two was to land came nearer, Keith began to feel frightened. He did not want to do this! He couldn't do it! If he made a mistake, he would have a plane 'full of dead people' on his conscience. It had happened to him before.

	Mel Bakersfeld, someone said, was ready to break up the Aereo-Mexican plane in order to clear runway three zero.

	The flower-like double signal of a plane in trouble appeared on the edge of the radar screen - unmistakably Trans America Flight Two. Keith looked around for Tevis. He couldn't do it!

	He opened his mouth to call Tevis, but no words would come. It was like all the bad dreams that he had suffered from since the day when the Redferns had died.

	He heard voices. They were waiting for him to reply, but he could say nothing. Where was Tevis? Suddenly, Keith felt a terrible anger - against his father, who had pushed him into this job; against Mel, who always seemed to be so successful; against Tevis; against everyone in this airport that he hated.

	Somehow, the anger seemed to free his voice. 'Trans America Two,' he said, 'this is Lincoln. Sorry we kept you waiting. We're hoping to give you runway three zero. We'll know in three to five minutes if it's clear.'

	Keith had no thought for anything but his work now. He would bring Flight Two down safely.

	Mel had given the order for the vehicles to move in. Patroni had been told to get out of their way.



	CHAPTER THIRTY EIGHT

	Joe Patroni Tries Again

	Joe Patroni knew that time was running out. He had not started the engines of the Aereo-Mexican 707 until the last possible moment, so that his men could continue the work of clearing the snow around the plane.

	When he realized that he could not wait any longer, he had a final look at the ground around the plane. He did not like what he saw. They needed to work for another 15 minutes, but they simply did not have that time.

	He climbed into the plane, and shouted to Ingram: 'Get everybody out of the way! I'm starting the engines.' Men ran out from under the plane.

	Snow was still falling, but it was lighter now.

	Patroni called again: 'Send someone to help me up here - someone thin! I don't want to make this plane any heavier.'

	Through the window he could see Mel's car, and behind it a line of snowploughs and heavy vehicles. When Mel had told him that he might have to push the plane off the runway with these vehicles, Patroni had been shocked. He found it hard to believe that anyone could destroy a fine machine on purpose. It was not that he did not care about the people on board the Golden Argosy, it was just that he loved planes, and could not bear to think that this one would be destroyed.

	A young mechanic ran over to the plane. 'What's your name, son?' Patroni asked.

	'Rolling, sir.'

	Patroni laughed. 'We're trying to get this plane rolling! Perhaps you'll bring us luck!'

	'Ready to start,' Ingram called.

	Patroni started the engines, number three first, and then four, two and one. The noise grew louder and louder.

	'Hold on, son!' Patroni told Rolling.

	He increased the power. To their left he could see Mel Bakersfeld's car, and he knew that they had only a few minutes left.

	The plane shook, but it did not move. The young mechanic looked worried.

	'Come on!' Patroni exclaimed. 'Let's go!'

	'Mr Patroni!' Rolling warned, 'we can't do it!'

	Then the radio message came; 'Joe Patroni on board Aereo-Mexican. This is Ground Control. We have a message from Mr Bakersfeld: There is no more time. Stop all engines. Repeat - stop all engines.'

	Patroni said nothing.

	'Mr Patroni!' Rolling shouted. 'Do you hear? We have to stop!'

	'Can't hear you,' Patroni shouted. 'Too noisy in here.' There's always more time left than those people in Ground Control will admit, he thought. If only he had a cigar! He needed one badly, but his pocket was empty. Mel Bakersfeld had promised him a box if he could move this plane, he remembered.

	He pushed the controls to their limit. The radio seemed to be going mad. All around them lights were flashing.

	Suddenly the plane moved forwards. At first it moved slowly. Then it gained speed, and shot down the runway. Patroni brought it neatly to rest 200 feet from the runway. Three zero was clear and open - and there would be another story to tell about Joe Patroni.



	CHAPTER THIRTY NINE

	Landing

	Trans America Flight Two, the Golden Argosy, was 10 miles from Lincoln, in cloud, at 1,500 feet.

	Anson Harris was back at the controls as they were guided in my Lincoln Air Traffic Control. Vernon thought that he knew the controller's voice, but he could not think who it was.

	Just before they landed, Doctor Compagno came to tell them: 'I thought you would like to know, Miss Meighen is doing quite well. If we can get her to hospital quickly, I think she'll live.'

	Vernon found it impossible to speak, and it was Anson Harris who said: 'Thank you, doctor. We'll be landing in a few minutes.'

	The passengers had been prepared for the landing. Two of the doctors were on either side of Gwen, ready to support her as they landed.

	Mrs Quonsett was feeling rather frightened at last, and was holding her neighbour's hand tightly. She was tired. So much had happened to her in the last 24 hours. The captain had thanked her for her help, and had promised her a free first-class trip to New York and back. What a kind and wonderful man he was, she thought. The only thing was - would she be alive to take the free trip?

	Judy was still helping her neighbours with their baby. The child was sleeping peacefully, with no idea of the danger it was in.

	They were flying at 170 miles an hour. The weight of the plane meant that they would lose speed slowly after touching down on the runway, so that an extremely long runway was necessary for their safety.

	Keith Bakersfeld's voice announced: 'Runway three zero is open.'

	'Thank heavens!' Vernon said. 'At the very last moment!'

	'We're going in low,' Harris said.

	Vernon was looking out into the clouds and darkness, trying to see the airport lights. He was thinking of the great danger that they were all in. The landing would be heavy and fast, and there was a chance that the tail of the plane might break off. If it does, he thought, we're all dead. That man who made the bomb - what a pity he died! I'd like to tear him to pieces with my own hands!

	They were coming down at 90 feet a minute. Harris was doing everything perfectly, but Vernon still wished that he could be at the controls. 'You must live, Gwen!' he said softly to himself. He knew that somehow they would find a way through their difficulties.

	The plane came out of the clouds, and they could see the runway lights ahead of them.

	'Clear to land,' Keith's voice said. 'Good luck, and out.'

	They sped over the edge of the airfield. To the two pilots, the runway had never looked shorter.

	They were above the runway now, and still moving at great speed. They were down, heavily. The end of the runway seemed to be rushing towards them. Beyond it lay snow and darkness.

	Then they were slowing down. The darkness came nearer and nearer. The plane stopped, just 3 feet from the end of the runway.



	CHAPTER FORTY

	Keith Says Goodbye

	In the radar room, Keith Bakersfeld looked at the clock and knew that he should remain on duty for another half-hour. He did not care.

	He stood up and looked around. 'Tevis,' he said, 'I'm going. Thank you for trying to help me. Goodbye.'

	He walked out of the room for ever, knowing that he should have done this years ago. He felt extremely happy. He had brought Flight Two down safely, and that would be his last job in Air Traffic Control.

	He went to the small rest room where he kept his food and his coat. He took the photograph of Natalie out of his pocket, as he had done earlier that night. When he looked at her smiling face, he wanted to cry. He put the photograph back in his pocket. He would never come back to this room again.

	It was at that moment he came to a new decision. He was not going back to the,hotel, but home to Natalie. He knew that he would never work again in aviation, and that he would have to live with his memories. He would never be able to forget little Valerie and her death - but he would live. The Redferns were dead. Nothing could change that. But his own family was alive, and he was going to them now.

	As he walked to his car, he threw the Nembutal into the snow.



	CHAPTER FORTY ONE

	The End of the Storm

	Mel Bakersfeld watched from his car as Flight Two landed and stopped safely at the end of the runway. The airport's emergency vehicles raced towards it.

	Tanya and Tomlinson were going back to the terminal with Joe Patroni. Tanya would be needed at Gate 47 when the passengers were brought off the plane. Before she left, she asked Mel: 'Are you still coming to my apartment?'

	'If it isn't too late,' he said, 'I'd like to.'

	She pushed her red hair off her face with one hand and smiled at him. 'It isn't too late.'

	They agreed to meet in the terminal in 45 minutes.

	Tomlinson wanted to speak to Joe Patroni and the airline employees from Flight Two. Mel supposed that they would be the heroes of his story - not Mel and his dry information about airport management. But the young reporter would write a good and fair story, Mel was sure of that.

	He watched as the undamaged Aereo-Mexican plane was moved away, to be washed and checked before it flew again.

	There was no reason for Mel to stay on the airfield now, but somehow he wanted to.

	Only a few hours ago he had felt that something terrible was about to happen. It had happened, although it had not been as bad as it might have been. But unless the airport changed, and changed quickly, something much worse would certainly happen.

	Lincoln International was out of date. It was well managed, had fine buildings and was used by thousands of people, and yet it was hopelessly out of date.

	Much had been said about the future growth of aviation, and not enough had been done. Mel knew that he must say what he thought about this. He had only one voice, but it would be heard.

	He would begin by calling a meeting of the Airport Committee. He would tell them how important a new runway was, and that what had happened tonight had shown him how badly it was needed. If they did not agree with him, he would fight them as hard as he could, and he would make sure that the newspapers and the public knew all about what was happening.

	People who thought that Mel Bakersfeld was finished were about to discover their mistake!

	Tomorrow he would move into a hotel. It would be an unhappy time, and he hoped that neither Roberta nor Libby would see him go. Later, he supposed, he would get an apartment of his own. He knew that he would never live with Cindy again.

	And Tanya? He was not sure yet what would happen. He knew that tonight he had needed the comfort of her friendship, but he did not know whether their relationship would be short or would last for many years.

	Other planes were now beginning to use runway three zero, arriving in a steady stream in spite of the late hour. As one landed, Mel could see the landing lights of another flight coming nearer, and a third beyond that. The fact that he could see the lights of the third plane made him realize that the clouds had gone. He noticed suddenly that the snow had stopped falling. 'At last,' he thought. 'The storm is moving on.'





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	Chapter one

	Information Flow is Your Lifeblood

	Information work is thinking work. When thinking and working together are significantly assisted by computer technology, you have a digital nervous system. It consists of the advanced digital processes that knowledge workers use to make better decisions - to think, act, react, and adapt. Michael Dertouzos of MIT writes that the future "Information Marketplace" will require a large amount of special software and complex combinations of human and machine processes - an excellent description of a digital nervous system at work.

	Do you view information technology as a way to solve specific problems? Then you're probably only getting a fraction of the benefits that modern computers and software can provide. Instead, you should be creating systems that will deliver information immediately to anyone who can use it - "digital nervous systems."

	As the boss of Microsoft, the world's most successful software company, I played a large part in the birth of the Information Age. In this book I explain the idea of a digital nervous system - the use of information technology to satisfy people's needs at work and at home, just as the human nervous system supports the human mind.

	Like a living creature, an organization works best if it can rely on a nervous system that sends information immediately to the parts that need it. A digital nervous system can unite all of an organization's systems and processes, releasing rivers of information and allowing businesses to make huge leaps in efficiency, growth, and profits. I have a simple but strong belief: how you gather, manage, and use information will decide whether you win or lose.

	The best way to put distance between your company and the crowd is to do an excellent job with information. There are more competitors today. There is more information available about them and about the market, which is now worldwide. The winners will be the ones who develop a world-class digital nervous system so that information can easily flow through their companies for maximum and constant learning.

	I know what you're going to say: no, it's efficient processes! It's quality! It's winning market share and creating brands that are recognized! It's getting close to customers! Success, of course, depends on all of these things. Nobody can help you if your processes aren't efficient, if you don't care about quality, if you don't work hard to build your brand, if your customer service is poor. A bad business plan will fail however good your information is. And bad practice will spoil a good plan. If you do enough things badly, you'll go out of business.

	But whatever else you have on your side today - smart employees, excellent products, loyal customers, cash in the bank - you need a fast flow of good information to make processes efficient, raise quality, and improve the way you put your plan into practice. Most companies have good people working for them. Most companies want to treat their customers well. Good, useful data exists somewhere within most organizations. Information flow is the lifeblood of your company because it enables you to get the most out of your people and to learn from your customers. See if you have the information to answer these questions:

	- What do customers think about your products? What problems do they want you to fix? What new features do they want you to add?

	- What problems do your partners have as they sell your products or work with you?

	- Where are your competitors winning business from you, and why?

	- Will customers' changing demands force you to develop new capacities?

	- What new markets are appearing that you should enter?

	A digital nervous system won't guarantee you the right answers to these questions. But it will free you from the old paper processes so that you'll have the time to think about the questions. It will give you the data to start thinking immediately, and to see the trends coming at you. A digital nervous system will make it possible for facts and ideas to quickly surface from deep in your organization, from the people who have information about these questions and, it's likely, many of the answers. Most important, it will allow you to do all these things fast.

	An old business joke says that if the railroads had understood that they were in the transport business instead of the steel-rail business, we'd all be flying on Union Pacific Airlines. Many businesses have changed their goals in even more basic ways. But it's not always clear where the next growth opportunity is.

	McDonald's has the strongest brand name and market share and a good reputation for quality. But a market analysis recently suggested the company change its business model. McDonald's has occasionally promoted movie-linked toys. The analysis suggested that the company should use its well-known small-profit product to sell the high-profit toys, and not the other way round. Such a change is unlikely, but not unthinkable in today's fast-changing business world.

	No company can assume that its position in the market is safe. A company should constantly be thinking about its options. One company might be hugely successful if it broke into another business. Another company might find that it should stay with what it knows and does best. The most important thing is that a company's managers have the information to understand where they can compete and what their next great market could be.

	This book will help you to use information technology to ask and answer the hard questions about what your business should be and where it should go. Information technology gives you the data that leads to deeper understanding of your business. It enables you to act quickly. It provides solutions to business problems that simply weren't available before. Information technology and business are becoming so tightly linked that you can't talk about one without talking about the other.

	The first step in answering any hard business question is to look at the facts. It's easier to say this than to do it. The principle is illustrated in my favorite business book, My Years with General Motors, by Alfred P. Sloan Jr. If you only read one business book, read Sloan's (but don't put this one down to do it). Extraordinary success can follow from positive leadership that's based on information and reason.

	During Sloan's time as boss, from 1923 to 1956, General Motors became one of the first really complex business organizations in the United States. Sloan understood that a company could not develop a broad business plan or choose the right projects without building on facts and on the understanding of the people in the company. He developed his own understanding of the business by working closely with his staff and by regular personal visits to the company's technical departments. His greatest influence as a manager, however, came from creating working relationships with GM dealers across the country. He constantly gathered information from GM's dealers, and he worked to develop close relationships with them that produced results.

	Sloan thought that fact-finding trips were very important. So he built an office in a private railroad car and traveled all over the country, visiting dealers. He often saw between five and ten dealers a day. These visits helped Sloan to see that the car business was changing. It was moving from simple selling to trading, as people wanted to trade their old cars when they bought new ones. Sloan saw that GM's relationship with its dealers had to change as well. The manufacturer and the dealers had to become partners. Sloan formed a dealer council to meet regularly with GM's senior executives. He also created a department to handle complaints from the dealers. He paid for economic studies to find the best places for new dealers, and even found a way to lend money to "capable men" who did not have the cash to become dealers.

	Accurate information about sales was still hard to find. When a dealer's profits went down, GM didn't know why. Without the facts, it was impossible to know what to do. Sloan said he would pay a lot of money so that every dealer "could know the facts about his business and could intelligently deal with the many details... in an intelligent manner." This would be "the best investment General Motors ever made."

	Sloan created a standardized system of accounts for the entire GM organization and all its dealers. Every dealer and every employee, at every level of the company, put their numbers into exactly the same categories. By the mid-1930s GM's dealers, its factories, and its offices could all do detailed financial analysis using the same numbers. A dealer, for example, could clearly see how well he was doing and also compare his results to the average across the company.

	An infrastructure that provided accurate information led to a company that responded quickly to events. Other car makers could not compete with GM for decades. This infrastructure - what I call a company's nervous system - helped GM to dominate the car business throughout Sloan's career. It wasn't yet digital, but it was extremely valuable.

	Of course, you couldn't get nearly as much information flowing through your company then as you can now. It would have required too many phone calls and too many people moving paper around and looking at the data to find patterns. It would have been very expensive. If you want to run a world-class company today, you have to obtain much more data and do it much faster. To manage with the force of facts - one of Sloan's business principles - requires information technology.

	If information management and quick responses made such a basic difference in a traditional industry seventy years ago, how much more difference will they make when they are powered by information technology? A modern car maker may have a strong brand name and a reputation for quality today but it is facing even greater competition from around the world.

	All car makers use the same steel and the same machines; they have similar manufacturing processes and they have roughly the same transport costs. Today the tests of success are how well they design their products, how intelligently they use information from their customers to improve their products and services, how quickly they can improve their production processes, how cleverly they market their products, and how efficiently they deliver their products and services to customers. All of these processes are rich in information and they benefit from digital technology.

	The value of a digital approach is especially clear in businesses such as banks and insurance companies where information is central to the business. In banking, data about customers is the heart of the business, and banks have always been big users of information technology. Crestar Bank of Richmond, Virginia, offers all its banking services over the Internet. It has bank employees in supermarkets and malls who can offer banking services to customers using digital information flow.

	In the age of the Internet and increasing competition in financial markets, the key to success is the intelligence of a bank's use of data and how well it responds to its customers. It's brains that give one bank or another the advantage. But I don't just mean the individual abilities of bank employees. I mean the overall ability of the bank to make use of the best thinking of all its employees.

	After the introduction of ENIAC, the first general-purpose computer, during the Second World War, computers quickly proved that they were faster and more accurate than humans at many tasks. Computers were not working at a high level, though. They assisted people but not in an intelligent way. It takes brains to understand the physics of a rocket; it takes a computer to do the sums in seconds.

	Businesses need to do another kind of work, "information work." This phrase comes from Michael Dertouzos, director of MIT's laboratory for computer science, and author of What Will Be. We usually think of information-a letter, a picture, or a financial report-as something that doesn't change. But Dertouzos argues that another form of information is active. Information work is the processing of information by human brains or computer programs.

	Information work-designing a building, making a deal, filling in tax forms-is most of the work done in developed countries. Dertouzos estimates that information work contributes 50 to 60 percent of the total value of the goods and services produced by an industrialized country.

	Dertouzos's idea is important. When computers went from simple number-work to modeling business problems, they began to play a part in information work. Even manufacturing firms have always put more energy into information about the work than into the work itself: information about product design and development; about marketing, sales, and supplies; about payments and finance; about cooperating with sellers; about customer service.

	To do information work, people in the company have to be able to find information easily. Until recently though, we've been told that "the numbers" should be reserved for the most senior executives. Sometimes there are good reasons for secrecy, but usually information has been reserved simply because it took time, money, and effort to move information around, so you had to be senior to order the work. On today's computer networks you can find and present data easily and cheaply. You can dive into the data to the lowest level of detail and look at it from different angles. You can exchange information and ideas with other people. You can bring together the ideas and work of many people for a better result.

	We need to stop thinking that getting information and moving information around is difficult and expensive. It's just basic common sense to make all of your company's data easily available to every person who can use it.

	All of a company's employees, not just its high-level executives, need to see business data. It's important for me as a Chief Executive Officer, (CEO), to understand how the company is doing across regions or product lines or different types of customer, and I take pride in staying informed. However, it's the middle managers in every company who need to understand where their profits and losses come from, what marketing programs are working or not, and what expenses are under control or too high. They're the people who need accurate, useful data because they're the ones who need to act. They shouldn't have to wait for upper management to bring information to them. Companies should spend less time protecting financial data from employees and more time teaching them to analyze and act on it.

	In many companies the middle managers can drown in day-to-day problems and not have the information they need to fix them. A sign of a good digital nervous system is that middle managers are made more effective by the flow of accurate, useful information. The systems should tell them about unusual events-for example, if an expense item is too high. Then the managers don't need to look at normal expense activity. Some companies work like this, but I'm constantly surprised by how few companies use information technology to keep their middle managers well-informed and avoid routine review.

	I'm amazed by the twisted path that important information often takes through many Fortune 500 companies. At McDonald's, until recently, sales data had to be "touched" by hand several times before it made its way to the people who needed it. Today McDonald's is installing a new information system that processes sales at all of its restaurants in real time. As soon as you order two Happy Meals, a McDonald's marketing manager will know. So that manager will have hard facts to analyze sales, not unreliable data.

	As we'll see in the description of Microsoft's reaction to the Internet, another sign of a good digital nervous system is the number of good ideas coming from your middle managers and knowledge workers. When they can analyze real data, people get detailed ideas about how to do things better-and they get excited, too. People like knowing that something they're doing is working and they like being able to show managers that it's working. They enjoy using technology that encourages them to test different theories about what's happening in their markets. People really appreciate information.

	A final sign of a good digital nervous system is how effective your face-to-face meetings are. Good meetings are the result of good preparation. Meetings shouldn't be used mainly to present information. It's more efficient to use e-mail so that people can analyze data before the meeting. Then they will be prepared to make suggestions and debate the issues at the meeting itself.

	Companies that are struggling with too many unproductive meetings don't lack energy and brains. The data they need exists somewhere in the company in some form. Digital tools would enable them to get the data immediately, from many sources, and to analyze it from many angles.

	GM's Alfred Sloan said that without facts it's impossible to put an effective plan into action. I believe that if you have good facts, you can put an effective plan into action. Sloan did, many times over. At the speed business moves today, we need more than ever to manage with the force of facts.

	What I'm describing here is a new level of information analysis that enables knowledge workers to turn raw data into active information-what Michael Dertouzos calls knowledge-as-a-verb. A digital nervous system enables a company to do information work with more efficiency, depth, and creativity.

	Can your digital nervous system do this?

	Like a human being, a company needs an internal communication system, a "nervous system," to organize its actions. All businesses concentrate on a few basic things: customers, products and services, earnings, costs, competitors, delivery, and employees. A company has to carry out the business processes in each area and make sure that they are working together, especially activities that cross departments.

	The sales department needs to find out quickly whether the company can supply a product before promising to deliver a big order. The manufacturing department needs to know what product is selling strongly so that it can change production priorities. Business managers throughout the company need to know about both-and a lot more, too.

	An organization's nervous system has parallels with our human nervous system. Every business has some processes that must continue for the company to survive, just as the human heart must keep beating. The need to be efficient and reliable has driven companies to automate many of these basic operations. But because managers have taken whatever solution was available, the result over time has been a large number of systems that don't always work together. Each independent system may work smoothly on its own, but the data in each is isolated and difficult to combine with the data in the others. Getting data about operational processes and using it has been one of the more difficult problems of business. But today's technology can make basic operations the basis of a much broader, company-wide intelligence.

	A company needs to respond quickly and well to any crisis or unplanned event. You might get a call from your best customer saying he's buying from your biggest competitor, or that competitor might introduce a great new product, or you might have a faulty product or an operation that breaks down. Unplanned events can be positive, too. You might get an unexpected opportunity for a major new activity or purchase.

	Finally, there's the conscious directing of your company's muscles, whether you're creating teams to develop new products, opening new offices, or sending people out to win new customers. To be carried out well, these planned events need careful thinking and strategic analysis before and after you act.

	You need to think about your company's basic business issues, and develop a long-term business plan to solve problems and take advantage of the opportunities your analysis reveals. Then you need to communicate what you want to do, and the plans behind it, to every person in the company and to partners and other relevant people outside the company.

	More than anything, though, a company has to communicate with its customers and act on what it learns from them. This primary need involves all of a company's capacities: operational efficiency, data gathering, cooperation, strategic planning, and action. The need to communicate with your customers will be emphasized again and again in this book. I'll show how a digital nervous system helps successful companies to do this.

	A digital nervous system serves two primary purposes in developing business understanding. It extends the individual's capacity for analysis the way machines extend physical capacities, and it combines the abilities of individuals to create a company intelligence and act as one. To put it all together: A digital nervous system seeks to create company excellence out of individual excellence to serve the customer.

	A digital nervous system gives the people working for your company the same kind of data for daily business use that you give to someone you bring in to consult them about a problem. With their years of experience in the industry and their knowledge of business analysis, consultants often come in with new ideas after they have gone through the data. But isn't it crazy that someone outside the company receives more information than you use for yourself? Too often important customer and sales information is pulled together only when a consultant arrives. You should have that information there every day ready to be used by your employees. Your managers should have information of the same quality that the consultant has. As we'll see in the following example, good things happen when they have that information.

	At Microsoft, our sales team calls only on large corporations.

	So every year Jeff Raikes, the man in charge of sales and support, struggles with the problem of how to market to small and medium-sized customers. We usually reach these customers through seminars and marketing with partners. But where are most of these customers? Are they all in the largest cities? Which cities should we choose for marketing?

	From the Internet, we found the average number of employees per company per city. From outside consultants we got information on the number of personal computers (PCs) per city. From our marketing managers we got information on our seminars and our work with partners. Finally, we included the number of partners per city.

	Using computers, we looked for a match between sales numbers and marketing activity. A Microsoft software program, MS Sales, gave us data in two important areas: last year's sales data, which helped us calculate growth, and income from sales by postal area. We found eighty cities that we thought were likely candidates for a new marketing campaign. But at Microsoft, before we invest money we want to know if the idea will work. We checked the eighty cities again using a marketing program, looking for an eight to one return on investment (ROI). Setting the ROI as high as eight to one would help us take out any cities where the percentage return might be high, but the absolute dollar return would be low. This gave us forty-five cities, later reduced to thirty-eight.

	In each of those thirty-eight cities in which we hadn't done any marketing before, we held two "Big Day" events. On each Big Day we showed Microsoft products and made sales offers, with our partners. The ROI was an amazing twenty to one - $30 million return on $1.5 million investment. As the Big Day events happened, we used the MS Sales program to measure our return against figures in similar markets to see if the Big Days were really making a difference. The results: cities in which we did Big Day events showed a 57 percent increase in income against a 16 percent increase in income in a control group of nineteen small cities that did not have Big Days.

	Today the program which identified the target cities has been improved, so that anybody in the company can see future sales opportunities not just by area, but by product, too. So instead of a seminar with all Microsoft products, we can find out if one city needs a seminar on Microsoft Office, another on Windows, and a third on Exchange.

	All that was because of the MS Sales program. A paper system could not do that work. The sales data now comes to us in a way that lets us put it into MS Sales immediately. This is inexpensive, and because we share this data with our partners, discussions with them about future marketing plans achieve better results. These discussions are still old fashioned face-to-face meetings, but everybody at those meetings is better prepared because of the data they have seen in advance.

	At Microsoft our information systems have also changed the role of our managers. When MS Sales first came online, one of our managers in Minneapolis checked sales in her area at a level of detail not possible before. She discovered that the excellent total sales figures for her district hid poor sales to large customers. Finding that out came as a shock to the large customer sales team, but it was also the first step toward putting things right. By the end of the year Minneapolis was the fastest growing area for sales to large customers.

	If you're a manager at Microsoft today, you must be more than a good sales team leader. Now you can be a business thinker because you have the data to help you run your business. You can look at sales figures and see where your business is strong and where it is weak, and which products you can sell, in which areas, to which size firms. You can try out new programs and look at the results. You can talk to other managers about what they're doing to get good results. Managers at Microsoft have a much more important role now than they did five years ago because of the easy-to-use computer programs that we've developed.

	A digital nervous system gives its users an understanding and an ability to learn things that they would not otherwise have. A good flow of information and good tools for analysis let us see new opportunities for profit among large amounts of data. It makes the best use of the capacities of human brains and reduces human labor.

	To begin creating a digital nervous system, you should first develop an ideal picture of the information you need to run your business and to understand your markets and your competitors. Think hard about the facts you need to know. Develop a list of the most important questions for your business. Then demand that your information systems provide the answers. If your current system won't do this, you need to develop one that will. If you don't, one or more of your competitors will.

	You know you have built an excellent digital nervous system when information flows through your organization as quickly and naturally as thought in a human being, and when you can use technology to organize teams of people as quickly as you can direct an individual. It's business at the speed of thought.

	Digital technology can completely change your production processes and your business processes. It can also free workers from slow paper processes. Replacing paper processes with digital processes frees knowledge workers to do more useful work. The all-digital work place is usually called "the paperless office," a phrase that goes back to at least 1973. It's a great vision. No more piles of paper in which you can't find what you need. No more searching through heaps of reports to find marketing information or a sales number. But the paperless office never seems to actually arrive.

	The Xerox Corporation did more to promote the concept than any other company. In 1974-5 it was talking about the "office of the future" that would have computers and e-mail with information online. Between 1975 and 1987 several business newspapers promised that the paperless office wasn't far off but in 1988 I told a journalist, "This vision of a paperless office is still very, very far away."

	Today we have all the pieces in place to achieve the paperless office. Better computers and software make it easy to combine data of various types. Highly capable, networked PCs are everywhere in the office environment. The Internet is connecting PCs around the world. But paper use has continued to double every four years, and 95 percent of all information in the United States remains on paper, compared with just 1 percent stored electronically. Paper is increasing faster than digital technology can reduce it!

	In 1996 I decided to look at ways that Microsoft was still using paper. To my surprise, we had printed 350,000 paper copies of sales reports that year. I asked for a copy of every paper form we used. The thick file that landed on my desk contained hundreds and hundreds of forms. Paper use was only a sign of a bigger problem, though: administrative processes that were too complicated and took too much time.

	I looked at the file and wondered, " Why do we have all these forms? Every person here has a PC. We're connected up. Why aren't we using electronic forms and e-mail?" As Chief Executive Officer I gave the order to ban all unnecessary forms. In place of all that paper, systems grew up that were more accurate and easier to work with and that freed our people to do more interesting work.

	Now, even before we employ a new worker, he or she starts on an electronic journey. We receive career information from 600 to 900 people applying for jobs every day, through the post, by e-mail at resume@microsoft.com. or at the Microsoft website at www.microsoft.com/jobs. Seventy percent of the career information now arrives by e-mail or to the website, up from 6 percent two years ago and rising. All career information from people applying for jobs is matched with open jobs within forty-eight hours, sometimes within twenty-four hours.

	A software program sets up job interviews. Every interviewer gets career details of the person applying for the job by e-mail. After the interview each interviewer sends comments on the candidate by e-mail. This sharing of information makes sure that interviewers build on each other's work, not repeat it. If it is obvious that Microsoft wants the candidate, an e-mail signal tells the interviewer to explain to that person why Microsoft would be a good choice for them.

	Let's say that someone called Sharon Holloway accepts our job offer. The imaginary Sharon is one of the eighty-five new people we employ each week. We'll say that Sharon is at Redmond, Washington. Before Sharon arrives at Microsoft, an administration assistant in her new department fills out the New Hire form on Microsoft's intranet to request office furniture, and a computer with software, e-mail, and voice mail to be ready for Sharon. The same form makes sure that Sharon's name is added to the company phone list and that she gets a nameplate for her office door and a mailbox in the building's mailroom.

	When she arrives, Sharon goes online to read the employee handbook (it doesn't exist on paper now) and she downloads any software she needs. Next, Sharon uses a program called MS Market to order office supplies, books, a whiteboard, and business cards. MS Market automatically puts in her name, her e-mail address, and the name of her manager on the order. The suppliers receive her request by e-mail and deliver the supplies to her office. An order above a certain amount of money would automatically go to a manager before it went to the supplier.

	Sharon's paycheck goes into her account by e-mail and if she wants to she can change her bank online. For travel, Sharon uses a program designed by Microsoft in partnership with American Express, called AXI. It's available online twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.

	Some people think that "Microsofties" have no life outside the company, but actually they do. Sharon gets married and goes on vacation with her new husband. She enters her vacation time online. When she and her husband move into a new house, Sharon enters her new address online once and it is automatically sent to every department that needs her address. She visits our intranet to get information about bus routes and ride sharing in her new neighborhood.

	When Sharon and her husband have a baby, she goes online to learn about seminars for parents, paid time off work for parents, and day care for children. Microsoft pays a certain amount in benefits to every person the company employs and they can take these benefits in many ways. They can look at different ways of combining benefits online. She can also buy and sell shares online, using the company that buys and sells shares for everybody employed at Microsoft, Saloman Smith Barney. Sharon can buy and sell shares in Microsoft and use her vote as a shareholder online.

	Using our computer network to replace paper forms has produced impressive results for us. As I write this book, we have reduced the number of paper forms from more than 1,000 to a company-wide total of sixty forms. Overall, the savings from using electronic forms have amounted to at least $40 million in our first twelve months of use in 1997-8. The biggest savings came from the reduction in processing costs. Accounting firms put the cost of each paper order - mostly the time of all the people handling the paper - at about $145. Electronic processing at Microsoft costs less than $5 per order.

	As we invented new solutions, our central information-technology budget, which covers these and other major business areas, decreased 3 percent between 1996 and 1999, mostly from standardizing data and reducing the number of information systems we have.

	Electronic tools give us benefits beyond reducing costs. For example, our Microsoft Market software asks for authority before it will process a request. This prevents the inappropriate purchases that can easily get through a paper-based system. Delivery information is typed instead of handwritten, so almost nothing is ever sent to the wrong destination. Communication with our suppliers is documented, and we know the costs in advance so there are no surprises. Our suppliers get paid faster, which means they want to deliver quickly. We're always discovering new benefits.

	The move from paper to electronic forms is an essential step in developing a modern organization's nervous system, but you should use the change to improve processes that are central to your business. A digital nervous system is easy to build on. A good network, a good e-mail system, and easy-to-build webpages are everything you need for getting rid of internal paper forms, too. Our internal tools have two goals: to use software to handle routine tasks, so that our knowledge workers don't waste time and energy; and to free people to do more difficult work and handle unusual situations. Our internal developers use the "sort-boiled egg" rule: A user must be able to get into and out of most administrative tools within three minutes. This makes sure that we don't create clumsy tools and cause more work overall.

	Improving administrative and internal business processes is an important way to improve the overall efficiency of your employees. When you give knowledge workers good internal tools, you also send them an important message: when employees see a company improve efficiency and get rid of time-draining routine administrative tasks, they know that the company values their time and wants them to use it profitably.

	It's easy to measure when you make your factory workers more efficient. It's hard to measure when you make your knowledge workers more effective, but it makes sense that workers who aren't burdened by routine tasks will do better work. The benefit to customers is that your employees spend less time on paperwork and more time on customer needs.



	Chapter two

	Commerce: The Internet

	Changes Everything

	Ride the rocket of change

	Not long ago I gave a talk to the board of directors of a German financial institution. These were experienced businesspeople. The youngest person there was probably fifty-five, and many of them were in their sixties. They'd seen a lot of changes in banking and they'd lived through a lot of technology changes, too. The bank had not yet, though, begun to use the new Internet technologies.

	On the day of my visit they'd heard a series of talks from Microsoft employees about the company. When I walked into the room, they were all sitting there with their arms folded across their chests, looking unhappy.

	"OK," I said." What's the problem?"

	One of them replied, "We think that banking is in the process of changing completely, and we're getting technical talks from people here at Microsoft - more technical than we're used to." He took his glasses off and rubbed his eyes and said, "This is probably good, although it's making us tired." After a pause he continued. "It's good that you're just going to make all of your products better, but what is the overall plan? To view you as a long-term supplier, we need you to give us a vision of the future. What are your organizing principles for development?"

	The senior Microsoft executive who ends a meeting with customers doesn't usually bring a prepared talk. Instead, the person answers questions and makes a summary of what we'll do in response to any important issues that have come up. So as I stood in front of the German bankers I was thinking, "Oh boy. We've spent eight hours talking to this bank and we haven't answered the customer's central concerns. Now I've got to do it without notes..."

	But by that time I'd given my talk on the digital nervous system a couple of dozen times, and I'd been working on this book for almost a year. So I began to write down the major changes that I thought were going to happen with technology in the near future. I was writing down ten changes that I thought would have a significant effect on industries, I told the bankers. These were important changes in customer behavior that were all related to digital technology and were all happening now.

	"I'm going to ask you whether you believe each of them will happen. Don't worry now about how quickly, just tell me whether you believe they're ever going to occur. If you don't believe they will, then you shouldn't change what you're doing with technology. But if you believe they're going to happen, and it's only a matter of time, then you should start to prepare for that change today."

	"Do you believe that in the future people at work will use computers every day for most of their jobs?" I asked. "Today a lot of people use computers occasionally, but many knowledge workers may use their PCs only a few times a day. They may even go a couple of days without using PCs. Do you believe that today's paperwork will be replaced by more efficient digital processes?" They did.

	"Do you believe that one day most homes will have computers? In the United States today, about half of all homes have PCs. The percentage is a bit higher in some countries but much lower in most others. Do you believe," I asked, "that one day computers will be as common in homes as telephones or TVs?" They did.

	"Do you believe that one day most businesses and most homes will have high-speed connections to the World Wide Web?" I asked. They nodded agreement.

	"Do you believe e-mail will become as common a method of communication among people in business and homes as the telephone or paper mail is today? Today not everybody uses e-mail even if they have a computer. Will that situation change?" They agreed that it would.

	"Now, if most people have computers and use them every day," I asked, "do you believe that most information will start arriving in digital form? Do you think your bills will arrive electronically? Do you think you'll be booking your travel arrangements over the Internet?" They agreed that these changes were coming.

	"Do you think digital equipment will become common?" I asked. "Do you think that all phones, cameras, videos, and TVs will soon be digital? Do you think that other new machines will appear in the home and be connected to the Web?" It was only a matter of time, they agreed.

	"Do you see a time coming when notebook computers become computer notebooks?" I described what I meant: a computer notebook is a new machine that enables you to take notes as you do today on paper and lets you carry with you all the personal and professional data you need. This will probably be the last change to occur. "The great thing about a computer notebook," I said, "is that however much you put into it, it doesn't get bigger or heavier." They laughed. There was a thirty-second conversation in German before one of them said, "We thought you said something funny, and then we realized you said something important."

	"Am I wasting your time?" I asked. "Do you believe these changes are ever going to happen?" By now we were beginning to have a conversation. They had a short talk among themselves in German. The banker who had spoken before said, "We've been talking about the same things at home and, yes, we believe it's going to happen. When it does, it's going to completely change the nature of banking."

	"When do you think it is going to happen?" I asked. They had another, longer conversation in German. Then they said, "We didn't expect to make this decision here, but we have. We were going to tell you twenty years, but then we decided that within ten years these changes will either have arrived or becoming very soon. Banking will be completely different."

	"To prepare for that change," I told them, "you need to make digital information flow everywhere in your organization." I talked briefly about the need to use the digital tools that they already had for their knowledge workers. I talked about digitally linking their knowledge systems with business information systems to create a new infrastructure around the PC and Internet technologies. If they did these things, I told them, they would be prepared for the three basic business changes that will occur as the result of all the technological advances:

	1. Most of the contact between business and customers, business and business, and people and government will become digital and self-service.

	2. Customer service will become the primary way of adding value in every business. Human involvement in service will shift from routine, low-value tasks to high-value personal service to the customer.

	3. The speed of digital operations and the need for more personal attention to customers will encourage companies to adopt digital processes internally if they have not yet adopted them for efficiency reasons. Companies will use a digital nervous system to regularly adapt their internal business processes to an environment that constantly changes because of customer needs and competition.

	Complex customer-service and business problems would require powerful computers on both sides of the relationship - customer and employee-I said. The new relationships would be helped by various electronic aids such as voice, video, and interactive use of the same computer screen. We'd see a world in which fairly simple personal-companion computers became common alongside extremely powerful general-purpose PCs that support knowledge work at home or the office.

	"Microsoft's vision," I ended by saying, "is to provide software that links all these digital machines together and enables people to create digital solutions based on the Web lifestyle. It's as simple as that."

	The German bank board had a final question for me, which is the question on everyone's mind: what should they do personally to get ready for this new digital world? My answer was: use the tools yourselves. Senior executives should use e-mail and other electronic tools to get familiar with the new way of doing things.

	They should see what their competitors' Internet sites look like. They should become Internet users. Buy some books and arrange some travel over the Internet, I told them, and see what it's like. If you're going to lead the digital age, you need to become familiar enough with the Internet to be able to imagine what the Web lifestyle will mean for your industry-even if the change is going to take years.



	For years and years enthusiasts have been saying that the Internet will happen "tomorrow." You're going to keep reading predictions that the big change will happen in the next twelve months. This is just garbage. The social changes that have to occur take years, and the infrastructure has to be extended. But when the social and technical changes reach a certain point, the change will be quick and permanent. The point will come where the Web lifestyle really will take off, and I believe that's some time in the next five years. As I said in The Road Ahead, we always overestimate the change that will occur in the next two years and underestimate the change that will occur in the next ten. Don't let yourself be fooled into doing nothing.

	It's hard to think of a business category in which the Internet won't have an effect or in which there aren't already new Internet companies. Lots of firms now wish they were the first Internet book store or travel agency, winning the first customers, the public enthusiasm, the famous name.

	Internet companies are not just learning new ways to do business. They are also rushing to break down the barriers between different areas of business. Amazon.com, which began as an Internet bookseller, has begun to sell CDs. There's no reason for Amazon not to sell other products as well. The initial reason for your company to go onto the Web might be to obtain cost savings and attract new customers. When you have customers interacting with you, you have an amazing ability to build on that relationship to offer a broader set of products.

	An Internet business is not like a bank branch where you can train employees on only a small number of products. The virtual nature of the Internet enables whatever shopping your customers want to do. You'll see more companies like Amazon, that are strong in one online area and then expand their product offerings. The warning to every business is that even if no one in your industry jumps in early, big online companies, trying to cover every commercial area, will move into yours.

	Learn about the Internet today. Find some of your customers who are already adopting the Web lifestyle. Use this group to develop models for how you might do business overall. Within a decade most of your other customers will have made the shift, and you'll be prepared.

	The middleman must add value

	Here at the start of the twenty-first century, a basic new rule of business is that the Internet changes everything. Internet technologies are altering the way every company, even a small one, deals with its employees, partners, and suppliers.

	Not every company needs to use the Internet to interact with its customers right now, but soon a company website where customers can do business with the firm will be as essential as the telephone and a mailing address have been. Already the great majority of Fortune 500 companies have websites. The Internet is reducing costs and changing the relationships of companies with their customers. The Internet produces more competition among sellers and helps sellers to find possible customers.

	In pre-Internet days, the only way customers could get goods from most manufacturers was through layers of middlemen.

	Today customers can do business directly with manufacturers eager to offer Internet service. Today any manufacturer can provide the Internet version of a factory store.

	Before the Internet, gathering all the information for financial services, travel options, and other products required lots of time. Huge numbers of service companies made their money by collecting and organizing that kind of information for customers. Today, despite search tools that aren't perfect, customers can go to the Internet to find much more of the information they need. And any company can provide valuable information cheaply on the Internet, without branch offices.

	In 1995, in The Road Ahead, I described how the Internet is helping to create Adam Smith's ideal market, in which buyers and sellers can easily find one another without taking much time or spending much money. The first problem in most markets is finding someone to do business with. The second problem is understanding the nature and quality of the goods and services that are being offered. The Internet makes it easy for a buyer to get background information about a product and to compare prices easily. Buyers can also tell sellers more about what they require, and sellers will be able to target their goods at the people who are most interested in them and sell related products.

	The Internet is a great tool for helping customers to find the best deal they can. It is quite easy for buyers to jump from one website to another to find the best prices on some goods. At least two different services provide price comparisons for customers shopping for goods such as books and CDs. Some travel sites feature automated bargain finders that can find low air fares. At least one company, Priceline.com, reverses the buyer-seller relationship by having buyers bid the price they're willing to pay for a car or a plane ticket and offering that price to various sellers. It is unclear yet how broadly this approach will be used, but it is possible only through the Internet.

	Over time, software will automate price comparisons even more, until they become effortlessly electronic. At least one online store already checks other major sites for the prices of commonly purchased items and automatically reduces its prices to make sure that they're always slightly lower. Without stores to pay for, the seller may still make a profit. Customers will be able to join together electronically to get lower prices in ways that have not been easy before. There will even be cases in which software representing the seller negotiates with software representing hundreds or thousands of customers.

	For the majority of products which are available through many stores, customers will benefit most. For unique products and services, sellers will find more possible customers and may charge higher prices. The more customers adopt the Web lifestyle, the closer the economy will move toward Adam Smith's perfect market in all areas of commerce.

	Customers can now deal directly with manufacturers and service providers, so there is little value added in simply transferring goods or information. Various people have predicted "the death of the middleman." Certainly the value of some kinds of middleman is quickly falling to zero. Travel agents who simply book air fares will disappear. This kind of high-volume, low-value dealing is perfect for a self-service Internet travel site. In the future travel agents will need to do more than book tickets; they will need to create a total travel adventure. A travel agent who provides highly personalized tours of Italy or the California wine country will still be in great demand.

	If you're a middleman, the Internet's promise of cheaper prices and faster service can end your role of assisting the contact between the producer and the customer. If this is happening to you, one option is to use the Internet to get back into the action. That's what Egghead, a major chain of software stores, did after struggling for several years. Egghead closed all of its physical stores in 1998 and began selling just on the Internet. Egghead now offers a number of new online programs that take advantage of the Internet, such as electronic sales for about fifty different categories of hardware and software, and for used computers. It's not yet clear whether Egghead will succeed and meet the test described in this chapter, which is that the middleman must add value, but the company certainly understands the principle.

	Every store needs to take the Internet into account. The success of the Amazon.com bookstore, which exists only on the Internet, caused Barnes & Noble to combine its successful physical bookstores with a strong online presence, and to start working with Bertelsmann, a leading international media company.

	For service industries, the Internet requires you to be either a high-volume, low-cost provider, or a provider of highly personalized services. For the high-volume, low-cost model, you use Internet technology to create a self-service approach. You make a lot of information available to customers and you drive a lot of traffic through your Internet site by offering the best price. Because only a few companies in any market will be the high-volume players, most companies will have to find ways to use the Internet not just to reduce costs, but also to deliver new services.

	E-Trade Securities started low-cost finance services on the Internet in 1992. By 1998 at least seventy companies bought and sold shares for their customers online, and the number was going up. Finance firms that still offer a service face-to-face or over the phone have a problem: most of the data about shares that these companies provide for their customers is available free on the Internet. But if the companies that do not offer an Internet service become electronic traders (e-traders), what can they do that is different to what customers are already offered?

	Merrill Lynch, the market-leading finance company, asked itself exactly that question when it looked at the way it did business in 1997. Customers have invested with Merrill Lynch for more than a century. The company has managed their shares by getting large amounts of financial data, analyzing it, and making long-term financial plans. By 1997 customers had more than one trillion dollars invested with Merrill Lynch. But the growth of low-cost trading and then Internet-based trading between 1992 and 1997 showed managers that the company would have to change. As Howard Sorgen of Merrill Lynch said, "Our customers were changing. The way people got information and made decisions was changing. We would have been foolish to think we didn't have to change, too."

	Merrill Lynch's main assets are its financial consultants, the people who advise clients about their investments. But in 1997 they were spending a lot of their time finding data and not enough time advising clients about their investments. The information systems at that time were expensive and hard to use. All the different categories of data-share prices, product information, the customer database, pricing - were on different systems, and all of them were incompatible and difficult to use. The new information system was built round the financial consultants. It helped them get data and develop the best financial plan for the client as quickly as possible. To save money and development time the company also wanted to use existing products when possible.

	Merrill Lynch managers asked their board for a billion dollars to invest in new technology. The board agreed that the best way to compete was to give the company's knowledge workers - the financial consultants-the best knowledge tools. So the managers got permission for what became a five year, $825 million project. This was completed on time in October 1998 for close to the $825 million estimate. Of that cost, about $250 million went on software development. Much of the remaining expense - a system for getting share prices and market news, for example - would have been required whatever software Merrill Lynch used. The actual difference in cost was about $250 million over four years. For slightly more than $60 million a year, approximately $3,500 per financial consultant, Merrill Lynch improved the information system for the 14,700 financial consultants in its 700 US offices and for another 2,000 consultants internationally.

	Chief Technical Officer Howard Sorgen showed me the Merrill Lynch solution. All systems are now fully compatible. All financial information, from any source, is organized into "pages" and then "books." The financial consultant can look anywhere in these books - at share prices on NASDAQ, New York, and Tokyo, for example. The financial consultant can see immediately if all the client's shares are doing well or badly and why. Before, this took a lot of time as shares in each company were looked at individually. Now, the financial consultant can even see immediately what would happen if one lot of shares was bought and another sold. Soon clients will be able to see these calculations on their own PC screens. Also, the system behaves like a well-trained assistant to the financial controller. If the controller's client has shares in a company, the system will put background data about the company on the screen without being asked, whenever the controller asks for the share price.

	Since the changes in the system at Merrill Lynch, financial consultants have more time to build stronger relationships with clients. Merrill Lynch then decided that giving more information to clients would make the relationship with them stronger, not weaker.

	Merrill Lynch Online is a version of the Merrill Lynch system for customers. It gives the customer some background data on which decisions are based, and it also has basic information about the client's account with Merrill Lynch. The company hoped to get 200,000 customers in the first year, an average of about 550 people a day. Instead, 700 to 800 people a day went online with the system. One surprise was the age of the customers who took the system first. Merrill Lynch thought that the younger customers who had grown up with the Internet would try the system first, but the older, wealthier clients were the first customers.

	After the first success, Merrill Lynch added more to the online service. Today, customers can e-mail their financial consultants, look at the latest share prices, and buy and sell shares. Merrill Lynch now see the Internet as an opportunity, not a threat. It gives the client information, but financial information is not financial knowledge. That is still provided by the financial consultants, who now have more time to concentrate on it. And they provide it to well-informed clients, who ask better questions than badly-informed clients. The aim now is to have the client and the financial consultant looking at the same data on screen at the same time. Then, as Merrill Lynch people like to say, "the real magic starts."



	Touch your customers.



	As electronic commerce grows, not only middlemen will find creative ways to use the Internet to strengthen their relationships with customers. The businesses that treat e-commerce as more than a way to easy money will do the best. Sales are the final goal, of course, but the sale itself is only one part of the online customer experience. Some companies will use the Internet to interact with their customers in ways that haven't been possible before. They will make the sale part of a series of customer services for which the Internet has unique strengths.

	It's important that customers come away from electronic interactions pleased enough to tell their friends. This is the most powerful means by which any product or company builds a reputation, and the Internet is a medium made for easy communication. If a customer doesn't like a product or the way a trader has treated him, he's likely to e-mail all of his friends. An Internet car site called Autoweb.com asks customers about dealer service by e-mail, and removes dealers from its lists if they fail to improve their service as a result of complaints.

	Today, the main competition for online stores is physical stores. Physical stores have much higher sales volumes than online stores. Online sales in 1998 were only 0.5 percent of the total sales in the world's seven largest economies. But that percentage will grow enormously in the next decade. As e-commerce takes off, the main competition for Internet sites will no longer be physical stores but other online stores.

	Rapidly growing categories for online commerce include finance and insurance, travel, and computer sales. Companies such as Cisco Systems, Dell Computer, and Microsoft are now doing billions of dollars each in business over the Internet every year. Chrysler expects its 1.5 percent online sales volume to jump to 25 percent in four years. Even the most cautious estimates project an annual growth rate of about 45 percent for online sales. The highest estimates were for more than $1.6 trillion in business by the year 2000. I think this is too low.

	Dell was one of the first big companies to move into e-commerce. The company supplies computers worldwide, selling more than $18 billion worth of products. It began selling its products online in mid-1996. Its online business quickly rose from $1 million a week to $1 million a day. Soon it jumped to $3 million a day and then $5 million. It is still rising. Computer buyers clearly like and find it easy to buy their computers on the Web. At the time of writing, Dell has more than 1.5 million visits a week to its website, and 11 percent of its business is online. Dell hoped that this would grow to 50 percent, maybe as early as 2000.

	Michael Dell, who started the company, believes in direct selling and computer-aided commerce. But he knows that the Internet has to be a basic part of the overall business strategy. Dell's entire business is based on online commerce and support. Dell's first site provided product information, let customers buy online, and asked for customer ideas. Dell learned a lot from the suggestions that came in, mainly online. Over time Dell has made hundreds of changes to its website. Customers can do more and more online. They can now see online the progress of the product they have ordered.

	"The Internet doesn't replace people. It makes them more efficient," says Michael Dell. "We had to build an Internet system that was so convenient, customers got more value for their time than they did on the phone."

	Having more information online for customers didn't reduce the value of Dell's sales team. Like Merrill Lynch, Dell found out that an educated customer is a better customer. Dell's sales team became more like consultants to the customer. And they have more time for consulting because buying and selling online is so much quicker.

	One of Dell's unique approaches to customer support was to create more than 5,000 individually designed pages for its big customers. About 65 percent of Dell's online business is from individuals and small businesses, and the Premier pages are one way that Dell is growing its corporate business. They make large purchases online easier and quicker.

	Only Information Technology (IT) can balance the need to keep enough stock to supply customers quickly with the cost of keeping too much stock. Perfect information about what the customer needs is the answer to the need for zero stock waiting for an order.

	Marriott International, the world's largest hotel company, earns more than $10 billion from its 1,500 hotels around the world under ten different brands. The hotels have had an online booking system since 1996, and although Marriott says the system was simple and just an experiment, it did $1 million in business by the end of the year.

	Marriott saw that the Internet could do even more, and in early 1997 they created a special Internet team. From the start, the technology team worked closely with the business team. Studies showed that one of the subjects people wanted information about most was travel. "The Internet is all about service," says Marriott's Mike Pusateri, "providing service to customers in a way that is faster, friendlier, and more personal than they or the company has ever experienced before. And service is Marriott's business."

	Marriott was one of the first companies to build an interactive home page on its website. You can search online for a Marriott hotel by asking for hotels in a certain city, for hotels with certain facilities, and for hotels that have certain features in their rooms. Linked pages show attractions close to the hotel, for example a golf course. Or, if you want to go to a Chinese restaurant, the system will list the six nearest. When you have chosen your hotel, you can find out about prices and book a room. There are also links to other sites that book rooms, like TravelWeb.com and Microsoft Expedia.com. Marriott's site has links to 1,000 other webpages.

	Because each visitor searches for exactly what he or she wants on the Marriott website, each visitor has a different experience. The website is visited by 15,000 people a day, which brought in more than $2 million a month in money from Internet sources in 1997. It's hard for Marriott to know what percentage of this return would have come in anyway, by traditional methods, but it is clear that the Internet is attracting wealthier customers who prefer its more expensive hotels. On average, an online customer spends more with Marriott than the average customer.

	Marriott has found, as others have found, that the more interactive a site is, the more business activity it gets from its visitors. For example, instead of floor plans future customers see virtual pictures of the hotel. Soon customers will be able to enter the place they want to stay and the names of other Marriott hotels they have stayed in. The site will then give them the nearest Marriott hotel that is like the hotel they enjoyed before.

	Marriott does not cut out middlemen, it makes them part of its customer service. The company provides special places on its website for travel agents and meeting planners. Thousands of meeting planners view the Marriott site because they don't have to visit the hotel before they make a decision on where to have their meeting.



	Adopt the Web lifestyle.



	If you asked your friends why they use the phone to communicate with their friends, or why they turn to the television for entertainment or breaking news, they'd look at you in a strange way. If you asked your friends whether they'd adopted "the electricity lifestyle," they'd think you were crazy.

	People in developed countries don't think much about their electrical products; we just use them. But people who are now in their fifties can remember when just a few families had TVs. Our grandparents can remember when much of rural America was without electricity. It's taken more than a hundred years for the electricity lifestyle to revolutionize civilization.

	When streets and houses were first wired, the only use for electricity was for lighting. Electricity's capacity to change everyone's lifestyle was hidden. Electric light was cleaner, safer, brighter, and more convenient than natural gas, oil, or candles. When the infrastructure was in place, though, new products were created that took advantage of electricity. Electric refrigerators, record players, and air conditioners applied the new technology to existing needs. The most revolutionary uses of electricity were the phone, the radio, and the TV. These new machines changed our economies and our lifestyles. People hadn't dreamed of these products before the infrastructure was available.

	Because the Internet is a communications infrastructure that depends on electricity, you could say that its popular acceptance is an extension of the electricity lifestyle. But the Internet is enabling a new way of life that I call "the Web lifestyle." The Web lifestyle, like the electricity lifestyle, will be characterized by new things happening quickly. The infrastructure for high-speed communications is producing new software and hardware that will change people's lives.

	Intelligent machines such as the PC are becoming more powerful and less expensive. Since they are programmable, they can be used for many different tasks. Within a decade most Americans and many other people around the world will be living the Web lifestyle. It will be natural for these people to turn to the Web to get news, to learn, to be entertained, and to communicate. It will be just as normal as picking up the phone to talk to somebody or to order something. The Web will be used to pay your bills, manage your finances, communicate with your doctor, and do any business. Just as naturally, you'll carry one or more small machines using a radio connection to stay constantly in touch and do electronic business wherever you are.

	For a lot of people the Web lifestyle is very close today. By 1998 more than sixty million Americans were using the Web regularly, up from twenty-two million the year before. By 1998 the average user went on the Web eight to nine separate times a month, spending a total of about three and a half hours a month online. It's exciting to see that people living the Web lifestyle are using the Internet to learn and buy in new ways. When the Sojourner landed on Mars in the summer of 1997, NASA's website had forty-seven million hits in four days from people seeking more detail than they could get from the traditional news media.

	Businesses are providing a wide variety of information and services, like real-time stock quotes, sports scores, and city guides. You can buy almost anything on the Web, from paintings to old toys. The Web is an ideal vehicle for helping to build a community, too. There are sites for tracking missing children, for helping people adopt pets, and for every pastime that you can imagine. Sites that involve citizens are getting excellent traffic flow.

	A cultural change as significant as a move to the Web lifestyle will depend on the age of users to some degree. The kids growing up with the new technology will show us the full possibilities. Personal computer use, high-speed networks, and online communication are widespread. Universities are getting rid of paper forms and registering students for classes over the Web. Students can look at their grades and even send in work over the Web. Teachers hold online discussion groups. Students e-mail friends and family as naturally as they call them on the phone.

	The adoption of technology for the Web lifestyle is happening faster than the adoption of electricity, cars, TV, and radio. Many people who use PCs at the office install them at home for work, and then use them for much more. A lot of people over fifty-five years old, who wouldn't usually add new technology to their lifestyle, want to use the Internet as a way to stay in touch with their friends and families. Revolutionary new uses of the Internet that none of us can accurately predict today will change the world as completely in the twenty-first century as the unexpected uses of electricity did in the twentieth-and faster.

	As people move rapidly online, one of the most basic changes will be the degree to which customers will manage their finances online. In 1998 only about one million of the fifteen billion total bills in the United States were paid electronically. Little online customer service was available. In fact, though customers can pay some bills online, in almost every case they still receive them on paper. When customers are able to pay online, the US Commerce Department estimates, processing costs will drop more than $20 billion annually. Today you have to calculate on paper what bills you want to pay and how much you want to pay on each. In the future, software will enable you to calculate online the effect of various payments on your bank balance. You'll make your payment exactly when it's due. And bill payment software will communicate with financial management software.

	By late 1998 about half of all American homes had PCs, and about half of those PCs were connected to the Web. The percentages are lower in most other countries. Reducing the cost of high-speed communications so people can remain constantly connected, and making the software easier to use, are essential to making the Web lifestyle common. I believe that by the year 2001 more than 60 percent of US homes will have PCs and that 85 percent of those homes will be online. For other countries to reach these levels of use they will have to invest heavily in communications infrastructure.

	People don't realize how much the hardware and software will improve. Take just one example: screen technology. I do my electronic mail on a fifty-centimeter flat screen. It's not available at a reasonable price yet, but in two or three years it will be. In five years a hundred-centimeter flat screen will be affordable. Screen quality will have a big effect on how much people will read on the screen instead of on paper.

	The cost of a personal computer is also coming down. Historically, the PC industry has concentrated on creating a more powerful PC at a particular price. Now advances are reducing prices as well. Capable PCs cost much less than $1,000 today, and lower prices are expanding the market. Looking at a ten-year time frame, you're going to have PCs that cost the same as a typical TV. In fact, the difference between a TV and a PC will be small because even the boxes that connect TVs to the cable system will have a processor more powerful than the one we have today in the most expensive PC.

	Smaller personal companions will become common. These will include the small PCs on the market today, and new PCs that are the size of a wallet, which will enable electronic operations. The phone, radio, and TV will pick up new capabilities as they go digital. Some machines will be carried with you. Some will be in different rooms in your house. Others will become standard in vehicles.

	Any of them will enable you to use e-mail and voice mail, get information from stock reports or other news, and find out the latest weather and news of your flight. These machines will connect through wires or through technologies that don't use wires, such as radio. Though the machines will operate independently, they will exchange data among themselves automatically.

	These machines will become part of ordinary life. When you leave the office for the day, your personal digital companion will download your e-mail, which might include a grocery list from your husband or wife. At the store, you can download a new recipe, and all of the items for the meal will be added to your list. Your digital companion is smart enough to speak to all the machines that need to know your home or work schedule, but only tells the kitchen machines about the recipe. From a computer in the kitchen, you check the house. A video of the front door area shows who called when no one was home.

	Digital security cameras connected to a network are becoming cheaper and will be common to reduce theft. Some schools are providing cameras to enable parents to check on their kids while they're at school.

	While dinner is cooking, you go to a private website for your extended family, and find out that everyone has been in the chat room discussing what to do when the family meets. They used electronic voting to choose half a dozen possible events, and they've asked you to book as many of them as you can. A software agent, which knows you have already booked travel for the trip, suggests several things to do locally, including sailing, which was on your family's list. The agent also tells you about a new, lower air fare to your destination. You digitally book the sailing and the lower fares.

	When you're ready to watch TV, you might look at the electronic programming guide on screen or use another software agent to see what's on. You've told the agent your viewing tastes and it's tracked your actual viewing patterns, so it recommends several shows among the hundreds available on digital TV. You choose to see a football game. While watching, you use the interactive menu to enter a contest and to vote for the most valuable player. Viewer scores will count for half the final result. You watch a commercial advertising a car. Most viewers see a commercial for a truck, but data that you have volunteered through your TV indicates that you're a better candidate for a family vehicle.

	Development of intelligent, interactive TV will come as television moves to digital technology. Digital broadcasts are easy to correct for errors, and allow high-quality video and sound. Digital TV can do a lot more than improve broadcast quality, though. Satellite and cable companies are already using digital TV to deliver more channels. Over time, the biggest effect of digital TV will come from the ability to include other digital data, providing interactivity, intelligent software, targeted advertising and sales offers, and the Web.

	Broadcasters will provide greater content such as links to relevant websites or entirely new Web content that adds to the broadcast, or music, or software that can be downloaded for a fee. Many of the new features require a two-way link, which is easy for the new cable TV systems. New technology will make the TV interface easier. Trying to record one or more programs at certain times and days remains annoyingly complex. In the future, taping a show will be as simple as telling the TV exactly what you want to tape. Using speech to interact with the TV, PC, or other personal companions will be common within ten years.

	Bandwidth, the information-carrying capacity of a digital communications system, remains the biggest barrier to the widespread adoption of the Web lifestyle in all countries. Bandwidth is also the biggest cost. In developed nations businesses can generally afford the bandwidth they need to work digitally because lots of communications companies are wiring business districts. But it will take much longer to get affordable wiring into homes, schools, and libraries, which is critical to achieving a fully connected society. We will only see the benefits of a Web lifestyle when high-bandwidth systems are in place. The most important step for a country to achieve a high-bandwidth infrastructure is to encourage competition in the communications industry.

	Scientists all over the world are exploring new communications technologies - and old ones. Recently a British engineer developed a way to send high-speed voice and data signals on ordinary electrical current, raising the possibility that Internet service could one day ride into your home over our existing infrastructure of electrical wires. This and other technologies such as satellite broadcasting are exciting because they don't require us to replace the existing wiring that already connects most homes in the developed world. It's a huge task to get the Web infrastructure in place all over the world, but the advances in many areas make it likely that the speed of improvement will surprise everyone in the next decade.

	The social effects of the Web lifestyle will be enormous. A lot of people fear that computers and the Internet will make life less personal, creating a world that's less warm and friendly. Some people were afraid, at first, that the telephone would reduce face-to-face contact, too. Two people might call each other when they would have talked face-to-face without the phone, and two people might e-mail each other when they would have met face- to-face without e-mail.

	Any medium can be misused. The development of personal and professional manners for the Web will continue. It's easy enough to say that the Web lifestyle, with everyone in his or her little world, will cause society to fly apart. I believe the opposite is actually true. Just as the phone and e-mail have increased contact between people living in different communities, the PC and the Internet give us another way to communicate. They don't take any away.

	In reality, the ability to use the Internet to move or change the boundaries of our communities is strengthening personal and cultural connections. The city of Amsterdam, in the Netherlands, has Internet discussions about issues like city planning, safety, and drugs. Citizens can connect to the police by e-mail. An Egyptian site for children called the Little Horus website contains more than 300 pages of information and pictures covering Egypt's 7,000 years of civilization. It also has information about Egypt today, including its economic, cultural, and social life. The "Tour" section includes tips on popular destinations for children.

	The Web lifestyle is about broadening horizons, not narrowing them. Building communities is going to be one of the biggest growth areas in the next few years on the Web. The Web dramatically increases the number of communities you can join.

	In the past you might have had time to be a part of your neighborhood community and one or two social organizations. In the Web lifestyle you are limited only by your interests.

	One of the most powerful effects of the Web is the way it can connect groups of people independent of geography or time zones. If you want to get together a group of enthusiastic card players or talk about issues with people who share your political views, the Web makes it easy to do. If you want to follow what's happening in your hometown, the Web can help.

	How are we going to find the time to live a Web lifestyle and join more communities? The Web will make things more efficient than they used to be. You can quickly find out how much your used car is worth, plan a trip, or find out anything you need to know when you want to make a major purchase. These things are easy on the Web today. And people will probably trade some of the time they now spend reading the paper or watching TV for the information or entertainment they'll find on the Web. A British study in 1998 showed that about 25 percent of the British adults who used the Internet watched less television than they did before.

	Much of this book is about having all the information we want at the tips of our fingers. Most people want to find the best price for a product or to be up-to-date on the important issues affecting their local or national communities. We have managed without this information because obtaining it has simply been too difficult. The Web lifestyle isn't about changing human nature or the basics of how people live. Instead the Web lifestyle gives more people a chance to pursue their interests in a better way.

	The Web lifestyle will change the way people shop. With the Web as the world's biggest collection of shopping malls, customers will have choices they didn't have before. They'll be able to find all the choices for goods they want and, in many cases, have them specially made. They can have the final product delivered directly to their doors. Because customers are demanding faster and more personal service, and stronger relationships, the Web lifestyle will drive companies to develop a digital nervous system in order to stay with their competitors.

	The Web connects workers, friends, and families in new ways. Communities based on shared interests are forming with members from all over the world. Governments have the chance to involve citizens more than ever before. By enabling people to shop, get news, meet one another, be entertained, and gossip in ways we're only now beginning to understand, the Internet is becoming the town square for the village that the world will be tomorrow.

	With a Web lifestyle, people can overcome many of the barriers that have existed for so long that we almost take them for granted. The Web lifestyle is not about adding complexity to already busy lives. As people become accustomed to the Web lifestyle, they'll eventually accept it unthinkingly, just as they do the electricity lifestyle they live today.



	Change the boundaries of business



	A flow of digital information changes the way people, organizations, and businesses work. Internet technologies will also change the boundaries of organizations of all sizes. In changing the boundaries, the "Web workstyle" of using digital tools and processes enables both organizations and individuals to change their roles. A corporation can use the Internet to work smoothly with professionals such as lawyers and accountants who remain "outside" the company walls. An important reengineering principle is that companies should concentrate on their basic skills and outsource everything else. The Internet allows a company to do this to a greater extent than ever before by changing which employees work within the walls and which work outside in a different role.

	Our basic skills at Microsoft are creating high-volume software products, working with other software companies, and providing customer service and support. We outsource a number of functions that don't fall into those categories, from help-desk technical support for our employees to the physical production of our software packages. The Web workstyle makes it possible to deal better with unpredictable demand. Because you have a great need for a skill, and then you don't, for some areas you want to be able to hire staff for a short time to deal with peaks and valleys. The Internet means that more companies can take a "studio" approach to running major parts of their businesses. Big Hollywood studios have full-time employees to handle finance, marketing, and other continuous projects, but the creative side of the business, the full-time movie-making staff, isn't very big at all. When a movie concept is agreed upon, a director brings together a large group of people to create the film. When they're finished, they move on to other projects.

	Web technology makes it possible for many different kinds of projects to be structured as studio-type work. A project owner who wants to hire a team can go online, describe the project, and find out who's available. People and organizations with the right skills can declare their interest, and the project owner can build a team quickly. People looking for work will find more opportunities for employment that meets their particular interests and needs-if they have highly specialized skills, for example, or if they want to work only certain hours.

	Despite these changes, big firms won't break themselves down into project-by-project production companies. Big companies will continue to balance the load of their work as they always have - they'll just use technology to do it more efficiently. Every company will experiment to find its most efficient size and organizational structure, though the trend will be toward smaller companies. Medium-size and small companies can take advantage of the boundary-changing possibilities of the Web to act much bigger than they are, without adding employees or offices. A small company with the right skills can bid on and lead a movie production, a construction job, or an advertising project. By joining with other companies and professionals quickly, it can act as a virtual large company to work on the project until its profitable end. Because the team can be broken up at the end of the project, the company can manage labor resources without the administrative burden of a large full-time staff.

	Some employees in companies of any size are naturally nervous about the effects of the Web workstyle. They assume that if their company chooses to build itself around Web technologies, their jobs may disappear. They won't - unless "restructuring" is just a fancy term to hide sackings. When a company downsizes, jobs are lost. When a company outsources, jobs move. The goal is not to get rid of work, but to move the responsibility to specialists outside. It's much more efficient for many companies, including Microsoft, to have an outside company handle installation and support for small computers, for example, because companies that specialize in such work can develop world-best skills and because we can ask for competitive bids for the job.

	Employees who react to the possibility of outsourcing with fear are assuming that work belongs "in" the company and not "out." As companies change, some people will have difficulties. Despite the understandable anxiety, employees should also look at the changes as opportunities to define their jobs the way they want them, and to work for an organization of the size and personality they prefer. They can even use this revolution as a chance to start their own business. Not long ago, one person who had been a writer watched Microsoft outsource writing work and recognized an opportunity. Today this person has a fine business managing a dozen or more writers, and Microsoft staff spend their time defining the work to be done instead of trying to manage the writing process for a bunch of different people. Overall the changes in organizational structure will be good for good employees.

	The Web workstyle is particularly well-suited to lawyers, doctors, accountants, and engineers, who usually work independently or in small teams. One of the reasons professionals have traditionally organized themselves into firms is to deal with the rises and falls of customer demand. Now, instead of joining together to make sure the workload is shared, they'll also have the choice of working on their own and using the Internet to find customers.

	Not everyone will choose this approach. A lot of people want to work for bigger firms. They like the idea of belonging to one company, working on long-term projects, and being part of the community and culture of a particular workplace. They invest in their career, and the company invests in them. A lot of the most interesting jobs, such as software design at my company, are central areas that won't be outsourced. Most companies, including Microsoft, work hard to make it attractive for good employees to stay long-term. Developers join Microsoft because they see the chance to design software or develop technologies that will be used by millions of people. Like many artists, they want their work to reach the largest possible audience.

	People who want to work for a big company will work for one, and people who don't want to will have interesting alternatives. A Web workstyle also makes it easier for people who have good skills but who can't, or choose not to, work full time. Because they can find more work over the Internet, and do more work from home, those people will have new opportunities. Society will benefit by making better use of this huge pool of talent.

	As a business manager, you need to take a hard look at your basic skills. Look again at the areas of your company that aren't directly involved in that work, and consider whether Web technologies can enable you to outsource those tasks. Let another company take over the management responsibilities for that work and use modern communications technology to work closely with the people - now partners instead of employees-doing the work. Also, consider the employees who have good skills and experience, but decide they don't want to work full time. Better communication tools may allow you to continue using these people. The competition to hire the best people will increase in the years ahead. Companies that give extra freedom to their employees will have the advantage in this key area.



	Get to market first



	Customers want high-quality products at low prices, and they want them now. Every business, whether it's a producer of products and services or a supplier to that producer, has to react quickly while keeping quality high and price low. Information technology has become a major contributor to the faster responses, the higher quality, and the lower price rises that have defined business in the last decade.

	Few industries illustrate the two main pressures of shrinking time and improving quality better than the car industry. Japanese car designs in the 1980s appeared fresher and their quality improvements more frequent than in American cars because Japanese car makers could take a car from concept to mass production in three years. American car makers typically took four to six years, and their costs were higher.

	American companies responded by breaking down the organizational barriers that had divided design, manufacturing, and sales divisions from one another. They also improved communications with their external partners. Designers, engineers, suppliers, and manufacturing personnel began to work in tight teams that communicated electronically, cutting the time from product design to salesroom floor by half.

	Other process improvements in the car industry have been significantly helped by technology, including the computer-aided design (CAD) of cars. The 3-D modeling capacities of CAD programs enable engineers to design a vehicle without having to build a model by hand first. The designers can see whether parts will fit together and can change part designs without building special tools. Electronic links between car manufacturers and suppliers have already reduced the error rate in parts delivered by 72 percent, and saved up to eight hours per week per car in labor costs.

	Customers have benefited from better cars, produced more quickly. Ford's achievements in production are representative of the entire car industry. In 1990 the company took five or more years to take a car from concept to customer, and it experienced 150 faults for every 100 cars, or 1.5 faults per car. By 1998 Ford had cut its cycle time by more than half, to less than twenty-four months. Its fault rate had gone down from 150 to 81 faults per 100 cars.

	In some industries the issue is getting to market fast when change is more and more complex. Intel, for example, has always had a ninety-day production cycle for its chips, which power most PCs. Intel expects to maintain this ninety-day production rate, although the processor is getting more and more complex. The number of transistors in the chip increased from 29,000 in the 8086 chip to 7.5 million in the Pentium in 1998, and what the processor is capable of grew by 10,000 in the same twenty years. By 2011 Intel expects to deliver chips that have one billion transistors. Moore's law says that the power of the chips doubles every eighteen to twenty-four months. If cars and cereal went the same way, then by Moore's law a car would cost twenty-seven dollars and a box of cereal would cost a penny.

	Intel uses a variety of management, production, and digital methods to maintain efficiency while putting more and more transistors onto a chip the size of a thumbnail. Each time the production process changes, new factories are built that cost more than a billion dollars each.

	In 1998 Intel introduced a "copy exactly" strategy to maintain the same level of efficiency and quality across all its chip factories. A program called D2000 made sure that every design engineer got the benefit of best practice across the organization. Intel discovered that more than 60 percent of the problems the designers faced had already been solved by another design team. It's very likely that any large company using manual processes would find a similar amount of repeated work. D2000 has helped Intel to almost double the speed of new product production since 1994, and it has helped Intel toward its goal of volume production from the first design of a chip, without having to go through several versions of a design to get it right.

	Although banks have always been big users of information technology, they have not had a reputation for fast time to market with new products or services, except for Banco Bradesco, the largest bank in Brazil. With nearly 2,200 branches and twenty million customers, Banco Bradesco has $68.7 billion in assets and serves three million people a day. It was the first Brazilian bank to use computers in 1962, and it was the first bank to offer automated cash machines, in 1982. Banco Bradesco uses technology to stay ahead of the competition. Even six months is too long to bring an idea to the market; the usual development cycle is weeks or, at most, a few months. The bank also aims to bring a new product or service to its entire customer base at the same time.

	For one small-business customer, Bradesco developed software to assist with money going into and out of the business. Now about 4,100 businesses are using this program. For another customer, Bradesco developed a salary card that employees could use in a Bradesco cash machine, even if they did not have an account with the bank. The card is now in use at about 1,300 companies and will soon be in use at 2,000 companies with one million employees. In each case, Bradesco was the first bank to offer the service.

	In 1996, Banco Bradesco became the first bank in Brazil, and only the fifth in the world, to use the Internet to offer banking services. By 1998 the number of online customers was growing at 12 percent per month. Online banking is more popular in Brazil than in any other country. The bank's website, BradescoNet, offers a full range of financial services. By being the first important commercial Internet site in Brazil, the bank has the opportunity to become the site that Brazilians go through to get to other sites. What better way to keep customers loyal to your company?

	But the bank recognizes that it needs to use its digital nervous system even better in the future. The bank wants to collect more information about each customer so that it can sell new financial products targeted at the right people. For example, if a program finds a customer paying car insurance, the bank could offer a loan to buy a new car, even if the customer financed his present car at another bank. Customer data is one of the bank's best assets. It will take Bradesco several years to put together all the information they have, but when they do they can offer many more financial services targeted at the right people.

	Time to market has got faster in the PC industry than anywhere else. In this situation a better flow of digital information does not just improve the company, it is essential for the company's success.

	In just a few years the product cycle for Compaq computers dropped from eighteen months to twelve months. By late 1998 it dropped to six to nine months for business products and to four months for consumer products. But with its older information systems, Compaq needed forty-five days to collect its worldwide sales information and reduce it to the single set of numbers needed for product planning. By the time it could communicate its manufacturing needs to its suppliers, the company would be halfway through the four-month product lifecycle for important products.

	Compaq started an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. All its factories now use the same software, so all the data that goes into ERP is compatible. The forty-five day planning cycle has now come down to a week. Although a week's sales are necessary to see long-term sales trends, in the future it will have data on sales per day.

	Compaq is also using real-time systems which help it to react to unplanned changes in demand. Using the same data that goes into ERP, Compaq wants to look at its supply and order position three times a night, eight hours apart in the United States, Europe, and Asia. With real-time data instead of data that is a week or even a day old, Compaq wants to be able to see and react to, for example, an unplanned order for 7,000 PCs, and work with suppliers to see immediately if the company can deliver the order in time.

	To be able to move as quickly as possible as a company, Compaq has moved all its data systems onto the Internet. An e-commerce system means that when an order comes in, the supplier sees this at the same time as the Compaq planner. But all this has to be done while production is still going on. John White, Chief Information Officer of Compaq in 1998, said it was like changing the wings and engine of a jet while it was still flying.

	Another software decision is: do you get all the ERP software from one company or do you get the best from a lot of different companies? Because compatibility is so important, most companies are going to a single company for all their ERP needs. But Microsoft is interested in making ERP work either across versions or with one set of software. Compaq's solutions are a good example of how technology and business depend on each other, and help each other.

	Digital processes make it possible for every company to dramatically shorten its time to market, although some amount of time and energy will always be required to deliver physical goods. MIT's Nicholas Negroponte describes the difference between physical products and information products in the digital age as the difference between moving atoms around (physical products such as cars and computers) and moving bits around (electronic products such as financial analyses and news broadcasts). Producers of bits can use the Internet to reduce their delivery times to almost zero. Producers of atoms still can't do this, but they can use bit-speed-digital organization of all kinds-to bring reaction time down dramatically. Almost all the time involved in producing an item is in the organization of the work, not in the actual production.

	Good information systems can remove most of that waiting time. And makers of physical products will find that online service will become as much a part of their "product" and customer experience as the physical goods they deliver. The speed of delivery and the interaction with the customer made possible by the Internet effectively shifts products into services. Product companies today need to compare themselves not with the best of their competitors, but with the best of all service companies.

	In the end, the most important speed issue for companies is cultural. It's changing what everybody assumes about how rapidly they must move. Everybody must realize that if you don't satisfy customer demand quickly enough, without lowering quality, a competitor will. When people accept the need for action, digital technology enables a fast response.



	Chapter three

	Manage Knowledge to Improve

	Strategic Thought



	Bad news must travel fast

	I have a natural ability to find bad news. If it's out there, I want to know about it. The people who work for me have realized this and keep me informed.

	A lot goes wrong in any organization, even a good one. A product fails. You're surprised by a customer who suddenly switches to another company. A competitor brings out a product that appeals to a broad new market. Losing market share is the kind of bad news that every organization can understand. Other bad news may be about what's going on inside the company. Maybe a product is going to be late, or it's not going to do what you expected it to do, or you haven't been able to hire enough of the right kinds of people to carry out your plans. An essential quality of a good manager is the desire to seek bad news rather than deny it. An effective manager wants to hear about what's going wrong before he or she hears about what's going right. You can't react appropriately to disappointing news if it doesn't reach you soon enough.

	You concentrate on bad news in order to get started on the solution quickly. As soon as you're aware of a problem, everybody in your organization must go into action. You can judge a company by how quickly it organizes all of its brain-power to deal with a serious problem. An important measure of a company's digital nervous system is how quickly people in the company find out about bad news and respond to it. Digital technology speeds business response time in any emergency.

	In the old days, every company's response to bad news was slow. Business leaders often learned about problems only after they became serious, since the only quick way to pass information was to interrupt them with a phone call. Before handling a problem, people had to find information in paper files or go down the hall to find somebody who knew something about the situation. When people had some information, they spoke on the phone or sent papers to one another. Every step in the process took a lot of time. Today the dawn of the Information Age means we can send information fast, but even now most companies don't gather the key information about customer issues in one place. By contrast, a well-designed digital nervous system operates as an early-warning system.

	The Internet was not always Microsoft's top priority. Its arrival changed our business and became the biggest surprise we've ever had to respond to. In fact, in 1995 various experts said that the Internet would put Microsoft out of business. This was bad news on a huge scale. We used our digital nervous system to respond to that crisis.

	On August 24, 1995, we introduced Windows 95, the most ambitious software product ever to reach the general customer. This was big news, and hundreds of stories appeared in the months before the release. Windows magazine said, "This year- for better or worse - Microsoft wins the war." A Time magazine story said that Microsoft was "the center of the computer universe." The introduction of Windows 95 itself was featured on major TV news broadcasts. Within a couple of months, though, the news stories were all taking the opposite view. The Internet had burst into the public's consciousness, and people believed that Microsoft hadn't been invited to the new party. Now stories in the press said we didn't understand the Internet. Smaller, quicker competitors would put Microsoft out of business.

	On December 7, 1995, we held our first Internet Day, where for the first time we publicly displayed the range of technologies we were developing to build Internet support into our products. Within a year of this we had "Internet-enabled" our major products and delivered a number of new ones that concentrated on the Internet. Now we lead in several major Internet areas. No one company will dominate the Internet, but Microsoft has come back to play an important role.

	How, our customers and the press often ask me, did we turn the ship around so fast? First, we were never so unaware of the Internet as we might have seemed to outside observers. It wasn't as if somebody said "Internet" and we didn't know how to spell it. We had several Internet technologies on our list of things to do. But let's also be clear. In 1993 we were not concentrating on the Internet. It was a fifth or sixth priority. At this time, we didn't have an overall Internet plan for the company. We didn't see that the Internet, a network for scientists and engineers, would grow into the worldwide commercial network it is today. The Internet, had such a limited capacity to carry digital information then that we saw it as a minor stop along the way. The Internet's sudden growth in popularity changed all the rules. People knew the Internet had faults, but it made vast amounts of information available and enabled easy communication. In 1993 alone Internet use doubled to more than twenty-five million people.

	The driving force behind Microsoft's response to the Internet didn't come from me or other senior executives. It came from a small number of enthusiastic employees who saw what was happening. Through our electronic systems they were able to get everybody to join them. Their story is an example of our practice, from day one, that smart people anywhere in the company should have the power to change things. It's an obvious way for Information Age companies to work: all knowledge workers should be part of creating the plan. But we couldn't make it work without the technology we use. For years everybody at Microsoft has had a PC with e-mail. It's a famous part of our company culture, and it's shaped the way we think and act.

	We reached most of the important decisions during this crisis in face-to-face talk. But our decisions were all informed by exchanges taking place over e-mail. Working together electronically cannot replace face-to-face meetings. It's a way to make sure that more work gets done before meetings so that the meetings in person will be more useful. Meeting time is so valuable that you want to be sure you're dealing with facts and good ideas based on solid analysis. You want to be sure that meetings produce plans, that you don't just sit around talking philosophy. E-mail helps turn managers from middlemen into "doers." It encourages people to speak up. It encourages managers to listen. That's why, when customers ask what's the first thing they can do to get more value out of their information systems, I always answer, "e-mail."

	How fast a company can respond in an emergency is a good measure of how well it responds to events. People in the organization will feel threatened by bad news, but that's OK if they feel it as a group. As a leader, I created a sense of crisis about the Internet in 1994 and 1995. Not to leave people unhappy or unable to work, but to excite them to action. The leader needs to create an environment in which people can analyze the situation and develop a good response.

	I like good news as much as the next person, but it also makes me suspicious. I wonder what bad news I'm not hearing. When somebody sends me an e-mail about an account we've won, I always think, "There are a lot of accounts nobody has sent mail about. Does that mean we've lost all of those?"

	This reaction may seem unnecessary, but I've found there's a psychological need in people to send good news when bad news is coming. It's as if they want to lessen the shock. A good e-mail system makes sure that bad news can travel fast, but your people have to be willing to send you the news. You must always be open to bad news, and then you have to act on it. Sometimes I think my most important job as a boss is to listen for bad news. If you don't act on it, your people will eventually stop bringing bad news to your attention. And that's the beginning of the end.

	In three years every product my company makes will be out of date. The only question is whether we will replace them or someone else will. In the next ten years, if Microsoft remains a leader, we'll have to cope with at least three major crises. That's why we've always got to do better. I insist that we keep up with events, as well as pursue longer-term projects, and that we use "bad news" to drive us to put new features into our products. One day, somebody will catch us asleep. One day, a new firm will put Microsoft out of business. I just hope it's fifty years from now, not two or five.



	Change bad news to good.



	If you treat unpleasant news not as a negative, but as evidence of a need for change, you aren't defeated by it. You're learning from it. Learning from failures and constantly improving products is a key to success in all companies. Listening to customers is a big part of that effort. You have to study what customers say about their problems with your products and be constantly aware of what they want.

	But it is surprisingly hard to get bad news from customers passed all the way to the product design groups. Most companies don't have an efficient chain of people and paper between customers and the people who can make major improvements. When the customer data finally reaches the product design group, it often isn't easy for the team to give it the right priority. All of the delays mean that improvements don't happen as fast as they should.

	I recommend the following approach to bringing customer complaints and wish lists into the process of product and service development:

	1. Concentrate on your most unhappy customers.

	2. Use technology to gather rich information on their unhappy experiences with your product and to find out what they want you to put into the product.

	3. Use technology to pass the news to the right people in a hurry.

	If you do these three things, you'll turn those bad news experiences into an exciting process of improving your product or service. Unhappy customers are always a concern. They're also your greatest opportunity. Listening and learning rather than being defensive can make customer complaints your best source of significant quality improvements. Adopting the right technology will give you the power to capture and change complaints into better products and services fast.

	For example, any employee of Promus Hotels, based in Memphis, Tennessee, can give customers their money back if they are not satisfied. A no-questions-asked money-back guarantee from a service company like Promus means something. The company has a good reason to fix the problem right away. And because every employee can act on the guarantee, employees watch for quality. So how does Promus stop customers using the guarantee for a free stay and complaining when nothing was really wrong? Technology. All complaints are dealt with by the same main computer. It can quickly identify anyone who goes from hotel to hotel claiming poor service and getting money back. Promus then sends a nice letter, regretting that the hotels could not meet the customer's standards and inviting him to stay in a competitor's hotels.

	If your customers can contact you electronically with their problems, you need to be prepared to answer quickly. When a customer mails a letter to a company, he or she doesn't expect a reply for a week, but the customer knows that the e-mail arrives in a few minutes, if not seconds. It's usual for businesses to respond to e-mail within a few hours or overnight. A few days is "slow." If you take weeks to reply, customers will take their business elsewhere. Because e-mail is so much easier to send than paper mail, you're likely to get many more responses, too. So when you ask for electronic responses, make sure you have the staff and the internal systems in place to handle them quickly.

	Listen to your customers and take their bad news as an opportunity to turn your failures into the improvements they want. Companies that invest early in digital nervous systems to capture, analyze, and build on customer opinion will stand out from the competition. You should examine customer complaints more often than company finances. And your digital systems should help you change bad news into improved products and services.



	Know your numbers.



	Jiffy Lube was the world's number one servicer of cars, but it was unprofitable when the Pennzoil Company bought it in 1991. By 1997 Jiffy Lube earned $25 million, the highest earnings in its history and an increase of 14 percent over 1996 earnings. Jiffy Lube serviced 21 million cars, an increase of 1.2 million over 1996. Driving this new success was a daily flow of information from each store to headquarters and back. Customer service information from all 1,600 Jiffy Lube outlets is sent to headquarters at Houston every night. Headquarters does immediate analysis on the figures. Beginning as early as 5 A.M., up-to-date data is available to each Jiffy Lube outlet. For example, if people in one neighborhood are not using their Jiffy Lube outlet as much as expected the manager of that outlet will know about it.

	"Know your numbers" is a basic business principle. You need to gather your business' data at every step of the way and in every interaction with your customers - and with your partners, too. Then you need to understand what the data means. The numbers shouldn't be your only concern but you should objectively understand everything possible about your business. If you're considering exchanging short-term profits for long-term gains, for example, you need to know as closely as possible the cost of that trade. Companies can use the data they collect to improve the efficiency of their businesses, strengthen their relationships with both customers and partners, extend their businesses in new ways, and develop better service and new products.

	There are two ways to use customer data. The first is to gather the numbers that show trends and patterns on which to base analysis, planning, and decisions. The second is to collect detailed information on the individual customer so that you can provide personal service. By creating a digital flow of information from start to finish, businesses are able to create tight links between knowledge management, commerce, and business operations. At Microsoft we showed big improvements as soon as we started using MOET (Microsoft Order Entry Tool) to take customer orders, and MOET is now an advanced website for electronic commerce worldwide.

	To use information well, you need to capture it digitally from the start and analyze it in digital form at every stage of your business processes. "Every stage" includes not just what happens within your company walls, but also what happens with both your customers and your suppliers. Knowing your numbers can produce big changes in all of your business relationships and give you a significant competitive advantage.

	The business side of any company starts and ends with deep analysis of its numbers. Whatever else you do, if you don't understand what's happening in your business factually, and you're making decisions based on soft data or emotion, you'll eventually pay a big price. Numbers give you the factual basis for the directions in which you take your products. They tell you objectively what customers like and don't like. They help you identify your highest priorities so that you can take fast action. Nothing else can take the place of understanding your numbers at a working level. Sometimes my friend Steve Ballmer, Microsoft's president, surprises the members of a product group by knowing their pricing structures and sales numbers - and the competitors' - better than the people presenting a plan to him. He has a way of marching into a room and immediately asking the one question the team doesn't have an answer to. He's done the work, and he's thought hard about the issues that come out of the numbers. He sets a high priority on decisions that are based on facts.

	The middle managers at a company are the people who should be analyzing the numbers. Other groups can help, but the people who deal with customers and competitive problems need to look at their business in every way possible every day. The analysis should support action and not just more analysis. Analysis should lead you step by step to a decision and to action. You have to think, act, judge, adapt.

	Starting with digital numbers doesn't just prevent unnecessary effort and errors. It also sets in motion the best ways to process the data afterward. Being digital from the start drives efficiency in manufacturing, shipping, billing, and other operational processes. Getting the data digitally is also the only way to make sure that you get information quickly enough to respond to customer needs before your competitor does.

	This need for good information to drive employees to quick action is one reason that "paper numbers" bother me as much as paper forms do. A printed sales figure or a printed number on customer trends is fixed. You don't have the ability to get in and analyze the detail behind the number, or to e-mail it to somebody to talk about it. With a paper number that looks wrong, you have to get hold of somebody and say, "I'm looking at this report, and this number surprises me." A lot of the time there's an easy explanation: a customer has put in a big order or has canceled one. There's nothing you need to do, but you still want to know quickly why the month's results look strange. If you notice a trend in a paper report, it's hard to send the paper around and get people to analyze it. Over time you stop paying attention because it's so hard to investigate. When figures are in digital form, knowledge workers can study them, attach notes to them, look at them in any amount of detail or in any view they want, and pass them around to get help. A number in digital form is the start of thought and action.

	Digital technology also enables a company to create a network of partners that serves its customers better. You can create a virtual company in which everyone is joined together by commerce, knowledge management, and operational systems. Your partners are better connected to you, benefit more from your success, and naturally respond to the same patterns of customer behavior that you do.

	When your information systems are designed to create a flow of information to and from your customers, the business processes of the entire supply system will become more efficient. Just-in-time delivery can be a reality for any industry.

	Digital information flow makes it possible to create an organization without limits, but it takes a new company culture to turn suppliers from "them" into "us". Traditionally companies have not thought of suppliers as a true part of the overall business process needed to serve customers. Today's approach is that of a "value network," a network of partners enabled by digital information flow. Everyone who touches the product must add value, and communications go forward as well as back. Companies in the value network aren't restricted by heavy chains of process, but can interact and do business with many different sellers as they need to.

	If the benefits of knowing your numbers and creating a value network are so persuasive, why don't more companies do it? Why don't more companies create a digital information flow to observe trends? Why don't they follow customer history? The main reason is that too few companies start with digital information. Existing paper systems cause people to assume that data is hard to get and work with. They have to work with piles of papers that they can't organize or analyze. They can't find patterns in their data. They can't turn their paper information into action. Because so few companies are using digital tools internally or with partners today, those firms that act quickly to create a digital nervous system have the opportunity to jump ahead of their competitors.

	To make the change to a more efficient virtual company, you need to look first at all of the paper on the desks of knowledge workers and ask: How could digital systems get rid of these piles of papers? As part of this inquiry, think of your business processes as extending far beyond your walls to include the entire network of your partners and customers. You need to develop business processes supported by a fast, reliable flow of information that will enable the customer to drive your responses and the responses of all your sellers as if you were a single unit.



	Move people into thinking work.



	The inevitable result of better computer systems is a smarter use of people's time. With intelligent software continuously searching through its sales data, following trends, and noticing what's selling and what's not, the British chain store Marks & Spencer can use its 500 to 600 buyers much more efficiently.

	Instead of working through fat paper reports from the previous day to try to find out whether sales are going well, the buyers can use their time more efficiently, using what the latest data is telling them. If sales are going well, no human action is needed, but the system checks sales data and notices any items whose sales are higher or lower than expected. Reports on these items are created automatically and they are all that buyers must deal with.

	Using software to handle routine data tasks gives you the opportunity to provide the human touch where it really matters. There's a dramatic difference between getting a note that was clearly written by a person rather than a computer. It's enormously valuable to have a person working with any customer who is unhappy about something really important, or who has special needs. In a hotel, for instance, smart software can dramatically shorten the check-in and check-out time. Staff can then help customers rather than filling in forms, and guests will enjoy their stays more as a result.

	Electronic commerce, though, brings new challenges. In a physical store a sales person can use clues such as the customer's questions, dress style, and body language to assess his or her interests. However, at a Web store no one sees the customer, and the goal is to let the customer do as much shopping as possible for himself or herself. Web store owners then have some interesting information to find out. Based on customer behavior, how do you construct a model of who the shopper is? It requires smart data analysis.

	Digital tools for analysis are changing the nature of work. Knowledge workers can concentrate on unusual events rather than on the routine. Of course, people don't like allowing machines to take their decisions for them. But when a database gets big enough and complex enough, the computer can do the initial searching and sorting far better than a human being. We're simply not able to recognize patterns in large amounts of data. And the available data - in databases, file systems, message systems, and websites - is growing all the time. The only way we can get the full value of all this data is to use computer tools to find the useful information.

	HarperCollins, the publishing company, uses a PC-based system to follow book sales so that it can print just enough books to meet demand. That way it won't be caught with large stocks of unsold books in stores, which publishers have to take back. After only a year in operation the new system has helped HarperCollins reduce returns of unsold copies of its most popular books from over 30 percent to about 10 percent. Each percentage point represents millions of dollars in savings.

	Using software to find useful patterns in large amounts of data is called data mining. It can help to predict whether customers are likely to buy an item because of their age, sex, hometown, and other characteristics. It can also identify customers with similar shopping behavior, and customers with specific tastes, in order to provide improved individual service. An Australian health-care company used data mining to follow buying patterns and discovered a $10 million fraud.

	The most common use of data mining is for database marketing, in which companies analyze data to discover customer tastes and then make offers to specific sets of people. For example, American Airlines uses information about the twenty-six million members of its frequent flier program - such as the car rental companies, hotels, and restaurants they use - to develop targeted marketing efforts that have saved more than $100 million in costs.

	Data mining is part of customer relationship management (CRM), in which information technology helps companies manage customer relationships individually instead of all together. With the patterns revealed by data mining, you can present your products to a customer in a way that's most likely to increase your value to the customer, and his or her value to you. Cost savings come from having more exact models of customers and so the amount of mailings is reduced. A direct marketing campaign for something like credit cards, for example, would normally get a return of about 2 percent. Mellon Bank USA in 1997 had a target of 200,000 new customers, which would normally mean a mailing to 10 million people. Instead, the bank used data mining to produce models of the most likely new customers. The bank was then able to meet its target of 200,000 new customers with a mailing of 2 million, not 10 million. In addition to reducing costs, each new customer was three times more profitable than usual because data mining had targeted the customers whose needs best matched Mellon Bank's services.

	This personalization will deeply affect all forms of advertising. As digital TV becomes more popular and electronic books become the preferred way to read magazines and newspapers, almost all advertising will move away from mass advertising to personalized advertising. The commercials that appear on screen will differ according to who is looking at them; different neighborhoods or even different homes in the same area could see different commercials. Big companies can become more efficient with their advertising, and small companies can consider TV and magazine advertisements for the first time. Today many types of advertisement are too expensive for any except true mass-market products. Soon even the neighborhood grocer might be able to afford commercials for people living near the store.

	Targeted advertisements should make customers happy. They're more likely to see advertisements that are relevant to them. Some people may be worried that advertisers have too much information about them, but software will make it possible for people to reveal only the information they want to reveal. For example, most people wouldn't mind if advertisers were given viewing patterns. Most regular readers of specialized magazines - whether the topic is sports, food, science, gardening, or cars - look at the advertisements as carefully as the articles. If you watch TV in the same way, mainly for one or two interests, you probably wouldn't object to seeing commercials that concentrate on those interests.

	Today most data mining systems are quite expensive, ranging from $25,000 to $150,000 for a small or medium-size business to millions of dollars for a big customer like Wal-Mart. One insurance company spent $10 million for a data mining system five years ago. The boss said he knew he could get the same results for a lot less money with today's technology, but the benefits had been worth the investment.

	That remark indicates the value of data mining, but these high prices reflect the old days of complex software, in which only the largest organizations, using a lot of staff or hiring specialists, could make good use of data. With the growth of competition in our information-based economy, customer data has become an increasingly important asset. Every company and everyknowledge worker must try to get the most out of the company's data assets. These new users can't afford big database budgets or specialized database experts.

	Fortunately, as data mining systems become available for PCs, you'll see prices drop dramatically and the use of data mining explode in companies and departments of all sizes. Soon every company will be able to do the kind of analysis that used to be reserved for the richest organizations.

	The greatest value of data mining will be to help companies decide the right products to build and the right way to price them. Companies will be able to look at a variety of packaging options and prices to see which are most attractive to customers and profitable to themselves. These possibilities are of special interest to companies that sell information products. Unlike a car or a chair, products such as insurance, financial services, and books cost much more to develop than to produce and have a value fixed more by the customer than by the physical cost of goods. The secret of success with information products is understanding the characteristics and buying habits of your most likely customers.

	The power of data mining will help companies to work out how to acquire new customers, whom to market to, how to price their products, and how to attract individual customers. Human creativity and skill are needed to use this information to create new packaging and pricing ideas, to see new products in the patterns of the computer results, and to develop exciting new offers. The better the tool, the more creative they can be.

	Managers need to invest in advanced tools that help people work. You should budget 3 to 4 percent of the salary of your knowledge workers to make sure they have the best tools, which free people to use their energy for creative responses to the patterns and trends identified by the computer. Using information to develop new products and services, and to work together more closely with partners and customers, will always remain a uniquely human task.



	Raise your corporate IQ.



	Like reengineering before it, "knowledge management" has been given so many meanings that it sometimes seems to mean whatever someone wants it to mean. News articles on the topic appear regularly. Consulting companies and websites specialize in knowledge management, and a "knowledge management" magazine started in 1998. If reporters talk to a database company, they find that knowledge management is the newest thing in databases. If reporters talk to a network company, they find that knowledge management means the future of networking. But as a general concept - to gather and organize information, pass the information on to the people who need it, and constantly improve the information through analysis and teamwork - knowledge management is useful.

	So let's be clear on a couple of things first. Knowledge management, as I use the phrase here, is not a software product or a software category. Knowledge management doesn't even start with technology. It starts with business goals and processes and an understanding of the need to share information. Knowledge management is nothing more than managing information flow, getting the right information to the people who need it so that they can act on it quickly. And knowledge management is a means, not an end.

	The aim is to increase corporate IQ. In today's fast-moving markets, a company needs high corporate IQ to succeed. By corporate IQ I don't just mean having a lot of smart people at your company - though it helps to start with smart people.

	Corporate IQ is a measure of how easily your company can share information broadly and of how well people within your organization can build on each other's ideas. Corporate IQ involves sharing both history and current knowledge. The workers in a company with a high corporate IQ work together efficiently so that all of the key people on a project are well-informed and full of energy. The final goal is to have a team develop the best ideas from throughout an organization, and then act with the same purpose and concentration that a single, enthusiastic person would bring to a situation. Digital information flow can help groups to function like individuals.

	A company's high-level executives need to believe in knowledge sharing, or even a major effort in sharing will fail. Leaders must also show that they themselves are not locked away in a palace, isolated from everyone else, but are willing to engage with employees. Jacques (Jac) Nasser, operations president at Ford, sends an e-mail every Friday afternoon to 89,000 Ford employees all around the world, sharing the week's news - the good and the bad - with everybody. No one checks the e-mail. He talks straight to the employees. He also reads the hundreds of responses he gets each month and assigns a member of his team to reply to any that need an answer.

	I don't send out weekly reports, but I do e-mail employees around the world on major topics. Like Jac Nasser, I read all the e-mail that employees send me, and I pass items on to people for action. I find the e-mail that people send me an amazingly good way to stay aware of the attitudes and issues affecting the many people who work at Microsoft.

	When business leaders have created an atmosphere that encourages teamwork and knowledge sharing, they need to set up specific knowledge-sharing projects across the organization and make knowledge sharing a key part of the work itself - not an extra that can safely be ignored. Then leaders need to make sure that the people who share knowledge are rewarded. The old saying "Knowledge is power" sometimes makes people keep knowledge to themselves. They believe that this makes them more valuable to the company. Power comes not from knowledge kept, but from knowledge shared. A company's values and reward system should reflect that idea.

	Knowledge management can help any business in four major areas: planning, customer service, training, and teamwork on projects. If you haven't done any work on knowledge management in your company yet, consider picking one or two areas in which to begin knowledge management projects. You can use the success of your projects in those areas to encourage knowledge management projects in your other business areas. Within a few years all leading companies will have achieved high levels of digitally aided knowledge sharing.

	Knowledge sharing can help brand planning across countries. Coca-Cola set up worldwide communication with its own e-mail system in the 1980s but it saw IT as an expense to be controlled rather than a tool to help better business. When this changed, all systems and functions were made compatible worldwide and the biggest user of technology was marketing, not finance. The marketing tool Inform (Information for Marketing) looks at data about consumer preferences in every country. From sales data, it can tell you what types of people in a small town in South Africa drink Sprite every day and how much they drank last March.

	Knowledge management can be used to make response to customers faster. Yamanouchi Pharmaceuticals, at $3.9 billion, is the third largest drugs company in Japan. They and Microsoft have made Web-based information systems an important part of improving quality and speed of answers to customers' technical questions. Product support at Yamanouchi can immediately answer about half the questions that come in from doctors. To find answers to more difficult questions they use Yamanouchi's Web-based PRoduct INformation CEnter Supporting System or PRINCESS. This uses electronic searches by product and by word. Answers are put into the system for use next time. In 1998, PRINCESS was made available to the sales team. The next step could be to make it available to doctors themselves.

	Online training is another area where knowledge management can make things faster and better. US Web trains people to use technology in business. It has developed SiteCast for interactive seminars. Online training has been really popular at Microsoft. In 1998 twice as many people were training online as in class.

	Digital information flow can help in product development, too. Nabisco has some of the most popular foods in the world. About a third of its new products are worldwide successes, a third do OK, and another third underperform. These results are better than average, but with competition increasing Nabisco decided to use information technology more in the product development process. Nabisco didn't need a new product development process. The technology was needed to help the product development team communicate with each other better and faster. A system called Journey now organizes the information that used to be anywhere on any desk in the office. All of the people involved in the development of any new product need only to click on the product to find all the information about it. For example, Nabisco developed a new product and something in the product was changed. The people writing the description of the product on the label saw the change online and changed the label immediately.

	Knowledge management is a fancy term for a simple idea. You're managing data, documents, and people's efforts. Your aim should be to improve the way people work together, share ideas, sometimes argue, and build on one another's ideas-and then act together for a common purpose. The boss's role in raising a company's corporate IQ is to create an atmosphere that promotes knowledge sharing and teamwork, to make a priority of those areas in which knowledge sharing is most valuable, to provide the digital tools that make knowledge sharing possible, and to reward people for contributing to a full flow of information.



	Big wins require big risks.



	To be a market leader, you have to have big goals. You can't just look at the past or the current state of the market. You also have to look at where it's likely to go, and where it might go under certain circumstances, and then direct your company according to your best predictions. To win big, sometimes you have to take big risks. Big bets mean big failures as well as successes. Today, looking back, it's easy to believe that Microsoft's current success was inevitable. But at the time we made our big bets - including starting the company as the first personal computer software firm - most people thought we would fail.

	Many leading companies hesitated to move to new technologies for fear of ruining the success of their existing technologies. They learned a hard lesson. If you don't take risks early, you'll decline in the market later. If you bet big, though, only a few of these risks have to succeed to provide for your future. Microsoft's current goals include improving the PC's performance beyond all existing systems, developing computers that "see, listen, and learn," and creating software to power the new personal companion computers. These plans are Microsoft's response to the future, in which all machines will use digital technology and need to work with one another. Whether or not these plans succeed, one fact is clear: we have to take these risks in order to have a long-term future.

	Risk taking is natural in a new industry. The computer industry is about as far into its development as cars were in the 1910s and planes were in the 1930s. Those industries went through revolutionary, and often messy, technical and business change before they became stable, and the same thing is happening in the computer industry.



	Develop processes that give people power.



	A business has processes that are similar to the basic biological processes that keep us alive. One of these processes is the function that defines the company's reason for existing - its manufacturing process, for example. This function has to be as efficient and reliable as the beating of a heart.

	A second kind of automatic process in business is administrative - the process of receiving payments, paying bills and salaries, for example. The administrative processes are as essential to a business as breathing. If the basic operational processes of your business fail, your company fails.

	Because the basic operational processes are so important - and so expensive - most big companies began to invest heavily in automating them years ago. But too often the automated processes were isolated from one another. Overall efficiency wasn't nearly as good as it could be. Until recently, for example, in the manufacture of some aircraft parts only 10 percent of the original metal was actually used in an aircraft. The manufacturing process had been improved at many individual stages along the way rather than as a whole. There was an enormous amount of waste.

	I have talked about business operations such as financial and other administrative systems in other sections. In this section I concentrate on production processes. An automated production process is necessary, but not enough on its own to make a company competitive today. A good digital nervous system can help you develop your employees into knowledge workers, changing your company's basic production processes into a competitive advantage.

	First, you need to use information technology to understand the inner workings of the process itself better in order to make it both more efficient and more responsive to changing circumstances. Entergy Corporation of New Orleans has increased the efficiency of its power plants with a new process-control system. This allows plant operators to adjust plant efficiency and analyze performance trends as they occur. Operators can actually look inside the plant systems in order to understand exactly how the machines are functioning and to work out whether a minor change or a repair might save an expensive repair later.

	An intelligent PC-based system makes sure that the highest-priority items are repaired first. The process-control system actually shows operators the cost of reduced efficiency if the temperature is ten degrees lower than it should be, for example. By attaching a dollar figure to operational decisions, Entergy is turning its operators into business people, giving them the information they need to run their units efficiently, and making them a lot more responsible for their decisions. And because production costs for Entergy's plants are available to senior staff electronically on a minute-by-minute basis, the company can improve its profits by moving power production constantly to those units that are delivering the most cost-efficient energy.

	Then you need to be able to get data from your production process to inform other business systems. The Stepan Company, which produces cleaning chemicals, has developed a process-control system that has raised the plant's output by 300 percent and saved the company millions of dollars through more efficient use of its equipment. But the efficiency gains are not as valuable to Stepan as the way that its process-control system can deal with changing customer demands.

	Finally, and most important, you need to feed the data from your production process to your production workers so that they can improve the quality of the product itself. If you provide the right technology to help production workers do fast analysis, they'll turn data into information that will help you improve design and reduce faults. Developing a digital nervous system allows you to give more power to as many of your workers as possible.

	In the new organization the worker is no longer a part of a machine but is an intelligent part of the overall process. Some metal workers now have to know mathematics to work out angles from computerized designs. Water-treatment companies train production-line workers how to do computerized measurement and math. New digital copiers require the service personnel to have an understanding of computers and the Internet, not just skill with a screwdriver.

	Human beings remain essential in operational processes that have to constantly improve and adapt to changing circumstances. An efficient production line needs people-well-informed, responsible people. As we organize tasks into processes, we give workers more responsibility. Computers will take over some jobs, but they will mean that many other jobs are no longer boring.

	When people can concentrate on whole processes, their work is more interesting and challenging. Simple tasks will disappear, or be automated or built into a bigger process. Work that involves repeating the same task over and over again is exactly what computers and other machines are best at - and what human workers are poorly suited to and almost always hate. Managing a process instead of performing a task makes someone a knowledge worker, and good digital information flow enables knowledge workers to play their unique roles.

	Most companies have been willing to give information tools to their high-paid office staff whose job is information work. Entergy and Stepan are proving that building systems around information flow and giving information tools to line workers can also provide enormous value. Entergy is changing all of its key business processes and pushing information and decision-making down to the operational level. Stepan is using information to manage its plants as a whole to adapt to changing customer needs. Both of these companies are applying knowledge management to business operations to analyze and improve production, quality, and failure rates. Digital tools bring more intelligence to their business operations.

	Give your workers better jobs with better tools, and you'll discover that your employees will become more responsible and bring more intelligence to their work. In the digital age you need to make knowledge workers out of every employee that you can.



	Chapter four

	Special Projects

	No health-care system is an island.



	A few years ago, a new Microsoft employee was called back to his home state because his mother had suffered a mild stroke. When she was well enough to leave the hospital, Mrs. Jones (not her real name) stayed with her sister while her son completed plans to move her near him. Mrs. Jones largely recovered but was never able to live on her own again, and her periods of good health were interrupted by hospital stays to treat more and more serious problems.

	The medical events of the last two years of Mrs. Jones's life show the best and the worst of the American health-care system. She received good care, including a number of very new treatments, from three different hospitals and more than a dozen doctors in two different states. As her physical abilities declined, her middle-class family was able to find good facilities providing greater degrees of care. Medicare and her own private insurance paid most of the bills; she and her family paid the rest. Her many doctors, nurses, and other care givers were professional and kind.

	But the system was far from perfect. When Mrs. Jones left the first hospital for her sister's hometown fifty kilometers away, a communication failure between doctors meant that her medicine was kept at full strength when Mrs. Jones should have been on a declining dose. By the time she arrived in the North West, side effects of the high dose meant that she had to go into hospital immediately. Because her records didn't come with her, a number of expensive tests had to be repeated.

	The same thing happened when she changed hospitals a year later. Her final three-week hospital stay, which did not involve any surgery, still cost $25,000. At one point, a doctor confused her with another patient and told her next doctor that her recent hospital stays were "an abuse of the system." This was less than a week before Mrs. Jones died.

	These and other problems went on even though Mrs. Jones had her family to help her work through the confusing medical and social services options. Her son and daughter-in-law took turns spending many hours standing in line at one agency or on the phone with another. And it took a year before they could persuade one hospital to stop billing them for services that had been paid for in full.

	Because of the many hospitals, doctors, care facilities, and public and private agencies involved, the amount of paperwork was enormous. Consider the number of people this paperwork represented. For every doctor and nurse who treated Mrs. Jones, there must have been a dozen billing people in several different organizations. It was like an old-fashioned military operation. For every soldier in the field, you had twenty people behind the lines handling administration.

	Most experts estimate that 20 to 30 percent of the annual trillion-dollar cost of the US health-care system is spent on paperwork. In hospitals that number could be as high as 40 to 40 percent. A single week's stay can create as many as a hundred pieces of paper. And, making things worse, about 13 percent of the one to two billion claims each year in the United States are returned for errors.

	Paperwork and complexity have risen even as the US health-care industry has shifted to "managed care" in an effort to reduce costs, prevent fraud, and provide appropriate care. With managed care, an organization will contract with a group of doctors to provide medical services toward managed results, and for fixed fees. More than 160 million people in the United States were in managed-care plans at the beginning of 1997, the last year for which figures are available.

	Doctors understand the need to control costs but feel buried in rules and layers of management. They're afraid that their medical options may be limited and that the care of patients may suffer. They have also made the situation more complicated by treating patient files as business records and often hesitating to share them with competing doctors. And they've largely been opposed to computers, although that's mainly because early medical systems were clumsy and expensive. Oddly, the managed care that many doctors love to hate may become the primary force that extends information systems into patient care and returns control of patient care to doctors. When you put enough clinically helpful information in front of doctors, they see the benefits and ask for more.

	Patients, meanwhile, are recognizing how much more information is available to them on the Web and how this information gives them a sense of control and responsibility in maintaining their own health.

	Clinical benefits have also encouraged health-care bosses to push for better information systems. Until now, health care has applied only 2 to 3 percent of its earnings to information technology, compared with the banking industry's 15 percent. Although health care is a high-technology field, the technology has been applied to individual treatment systems, not to information flow. Often the information software that is used is not designed to work with other information software, despite all the health-care areas that should share data: the laboratory, the blood bank, charting, billing systems, and the machines that watch over patients.

	Organizations have had to build special interfaces between the different software programs. A typical health-care organization can have hundreds of these interfaces. One organization currently manages 1,800 different interfaces. This complexity is one reason it has typically taken two years for a health-care organization to buy a new system and another two years to install it - too slow by any standard.

	Today the situation is more encouraging. The US government has passed laws that require a standard to be defined for electronic finance and administrative dealings, including computer-based patient records. Better information handling in medical organizations will be a requirement in the future. Some health organizations, recognizing that their patients' needs can't wait, are showing strong leadership. They're proving that a digital nervous system can be enormously valuable in all areas of patient care: from emergency services through hospital treatment, keeping in touch with patients, and long-term trend analysis.



	Imagine you had a health-care system in your local community built from digital parts. An intelligent emergency system gets you to the hospital quickly, and all the important information on your medical history and current medical condition feeds immediately into the hospital's computers. A doctor uses a touch screen, keyboard, or pen to order your treatment. Digital instructions are sent off to the laboratories. Computers supply laboratory results electronically. These and other reports are online for easy review by any doctor, on site or off. The system will tell doctors about any possible problems with the treatment or differences from the approved clinical path. Billing is handled automatically. Systems that process computer deals uncover fraud or unusual use.

	Instead of spending half their time on paperwork, doctors and nurses spend almost all their time treating you and their other patients. Test results and bills reach you in simple, understandable language. All the information about your treatment and medicine is assessed automatically over the longer term to help prevent problems.

	Your care after hospital is also scheduled automatically. You find medical information on the Internet and so your meetings with health workers are more informed, whether you communicate with them over the Internet, by e-mail, or you meet in person. You use e-mail to ask routine questions of your doctor and to be reminded about continuing health programs.

	When you change health plans, all your medical history goes with you instead of being lost or following after you several months later. Doctors use your history to identify trends in blood pressure, weight, and other patterns that might reveal a serious developing problem. Systematic medical analysis of the whole community makes the authorities aware of any worrying public health trends much sooner and more accurately than has been possible before.

	If health-care communities take an approach based on PC and Web technologies, abilities like these do not have to cost a fortune. PCs enable a step-by-step approach using standardized software. PCs are also now being used to control specialized machines such as blood and tissue analyzers, reducing their costs and enabling their data to be shared.

	PCs are powerful enough to handle hundreds of thousands of claims or inquiries per hour. All together, the technologies described in this chapter would cost less than $5 million for a typical health-care organization. This is not a small amount of money, but it is minor compared with the amount most health organizations spend on paper-based work and stand-alone computer systems today. With paperwork making up 20 to 30 percent of the $1 trillion-plus per year earnings of the US health-care system, the current cost is $200 billion to $300 billion annually - more than the entire earnings of many countries.

	Today the lack of information systems in doctors' offices is the biggest barrier to improving patient care. Only about 5 percent of offices in the United States use computer systems in their clinical work. Computerizing a doctor's office will cost from $10,000 to $50,000 for each one, but doctors can quickly recover the costs. A five-doctor office in Hammond, Louisiana, invested about $50,000 in PC patient systems that made it easy for doctors to enter data; the office saved $60,000 the first year in typing costs alone.

	It will take a big effort from health-care providers to improve health care through digital information. The technology is available today. An investment in a shared infrastructure and tools will enable not just a huge reduction in costs, but better health treatment for everyone. Change will be driven by two groups: patients who insist on being better informed and more involved in their own health, and health professionals who use these new tools to provide better care. Together they'll use a digital nervous system to turn the islands of health care into a single continent.



	Take government to the people.



	Government, maybe more than any other organization, can benefit from the efficiency and improved service that flow from digital processes. Developed nations will lead the way in creating paperless processes to reduce administration. Developing nations will be able to provide new services without ever having to deal with clumsy paper methods.

	But most governments are far behind business in using the tools of the digital age. Businesses going digital are stuck with many paper forms because governments are not yet online. The reason for this delay is a lack of organizational purpose. Because government processes use a lot of paper and people, in the past making them more "efficient" often meant a reduction in service. It's common for governments to forbid agencies to close any offices, which simply forces them to struggle to do more with less.

	At the same time, there are few pressures to provide better service. Citizens can't take their business to another tax agency or vehicle-license office. Government agencies tend to concentrate on their own internal organizational needs rather than the broad needs of citizens and businesses. As an example, consider the paperwork involved in hiring a child-care provider in the United States. The employer has to know that there are five agencies involved, each with its own set of forms. This complication, rather than a desire to avoid paying the taxes, explains why so few people follow the rules. In this and many other cases, to the average citizen government remains a threatening knot of separate agencies and rules.

	But digital processes and the Web lifestyle give government the opportunity to change so that it is organized around citizens rather than administration. Governments can take five major steps to help make the digital age a reality in their countries. The first two involve improving government services; the last three involve creating an infrastructure so that a country's businesses can compete in the digital age:

	1. Put government employees on e-mail and get rid of paper filing. Make sure that all information inside government is digital.

	2. Put government services online with an interface designed for the user. Publish everything on the Internet.

	3. Attract investment by technology companies and encourage electronic commerce, sometimes with financial help, but more often with joint projects. Create a standard for the electronic identification of businesses and citizens.

	4. Remove the rules that stop the communications industry from working efficiently. Encourage major investments in the communications infrastructure.

	5. Improve the skills of citizens by using technology as part of education and training systems at all levels.

	Government, like businesses, can make better use of software tools and e-mail to get far more benefits from technology investments. In developed nations many government employees and public officials already have PCs on their desks, and developing nations can put in a PC infrastructure for a small cost. The use of e-mail alone promotes cooperation between agencies and enables public officials to respond better to inquiries. Some US politicians are beginning to use e-mail to stay in touch with citizens, and Australia's national parliament is using digital work flow to make sure that inquiries are followed up.

	Governments need to make the decision to use digital information flow instead of paper. Internet publishing should be standard. Printed documents should be rare. The savings would be immense. The US government alone spends one billion dollars annually printing documents that are already available on the Web. Most copies of these documents are for public officials whose offices are already online. Most of the printed copies end up in the trash in the nation's capital. Web publishing of all government documents can reduce costs and make information far easier to find. Digital systems are also better for complex documents. The government description of a transport plane, which companies need if they want to bid to build it, weighs more than a house in printed form, but the data would easily fit on a couple of CDs.

	An online approach does more than simply reduce paper expenses. Web technology makes it possible for governments to provide a single point of contact for the public, a single online "face" to structure information according to what is important to the citizen.

	In several Swedish cities, for example, webpages organize a variety of services from various levels of government. Citizens can quickly find passport offices, tax authorities, and national insurance offices. They can get reports from public meetings and other public documents. They can even get real-time reports on public transport, based on electronic information from the vehicles, either using the Internet or kiosks. A kiosk is just a PC designed for public use.

	As the Internet provides the best way to interact with government, all citizens need to use it, even if they don't have PCs themselves. If electronic kiosks that work like bank cash machines are placed in post offices, libraries, schools, and other public buildings, they can help governments improve services while reducing the cost of delivery.

	Online systems are most useful for citizens and most efficient for government when they have more than one purpose. Governments should review all their dealings with citizens that require them to stand in line or fill out forms. Government should bring together all the agencies involved to develop a single system for handling all contact with citizens.

	The Irish government, using An Post, the Irish postal service, has done this best. An Post kiosks process bill payments, issue passports, issue licenses for vehicles, pay benefits, offer savings and investment plans-even sell stamps. Each kiosk is a tiny city hall, covering the work of half a dozen agencies. With many of the 1,000 An Post sites in small towns with fewer than 2,000 residents, the kiosks serve 1.26 million people each week-half the Irish population - and handle more than $9 billion each year. Changing or adding new operations is very easy.

	For government dealings like these, as well as for all commercial deals, security is essential. Security has two elements: protection of personal data while it's moving over the network and identifying the person carrying out the operation. Today there is encryption technology that is strong enough to protect the security of any electronic movement on a network, but US export controls on encryption technology restrict US firms from building it into their products. Since this does not keep encryption technology out of the hands of criminals, the software industry is working to change the US government's mind on this issue. In practice, the encryption that can be used is strong enough that in most cases the security of data in a network is not the weak link. Electronic data is as safe as data in other forms.

	Identifying the user is equally important. You don't want someone else getting into your government records or your bank account. Smart cards are a solution to identity problems, as with the cards for bank cash machines. In Spain a new kiosk system will let anyone find out general information about social benefits by going through a touch-screen menu, but the person needs a smart card to find any personal information.

	Though such cards are just like the bank cards used around the world, some people are worried that the government might collect too much information about citizens. Some nations have privacy laws that prevent a single card or database from containing all information about a citizen, so in some nations there will be two cards: one for financial operations with business or government and another for health care.

	Widely available information and the ability to put a lot of information on smart cards will cause societies to look again at the question of how information can be used. Should any employer be able to see a job candidate's police record? Or just organizations such as schools, which hire people who work closely with children? In the end these are political questions rather than technological issues. Each country will have to decide on the kinds of personal information that will be allowed on smart cards. Even if their use is restricted to identity only, the efficiency gains and the prevention of fraud are worth the investment. In London, 200 trial kiosks of a system like An Post's reduced benefit payment fraud by 750,000 pounds in the first year. When installed at all 1,500 post offices, the kiosks are expected to save 150 pounds million per year.

	Less developed countries may assume that a digital approach to government is out of reach, but countries without systems can start fresh with new technology, which will be less expensive than manual approaches. Developed countries have older systems that often must be joined together.

	Examples from around the world make it clear that many of the advances are happening in smaller governments - smaller nations and cities, counties and provinces, and the state levels of larger nations. Smaller governments are less complex and they can experiment and work out solutions on a smaller scale. For larger governments, the lesson is to start with smaller projects to develop the necessary skills and see how citizens respond. Concentrate at first on projects that directly touch citizens and particularly ones that get rid of organizational complications for the public.

	King County in my home state of Washington is probably ahead of many governments in the amount of information it publishes online, but the county does not yet package information or operations simply. To get a building permit in rural King County, you must obtain information from many sources: the phone book, phone calls to the county office, two or three printed documents, and the department's website. A single well-structured website, with all the information and links involving all steps in the building permit process, would remove most of the complications, and could automate some of the steps.

	Savings from new digital systems would represent a significant portion of every government's budget. The US military recently found that it was spending more money to process and approve travel permits, $2.3 billion, than it was spending on travel itself, $2 billion. The US government budget is $27 billion for food stamps, $25 billion for social benefits, and $13 billion for public housing. These programs all have enormously expensive paper-based administrative systems that eat up 30 percent of the money. Good digital systems could push this below 10 percent.

	Citizens are becoming more aware of the power of the Web and they are no longer willing to accept the idea that government service should be slow or confusing. No customer would stand in line for two hours to get service from a private business. Why should a worker stand in line for two hours at a government office and lose two hours of pay, when by using the Internet he could get his license or pay his fees and be at work on time?

	Government alone, by building key services around the Internet, will provide a big reason for citizens to move to a Web lifestyle. If the government, usually the largest "business" in any country, is a leader in the use of technology, it will automatically lift the country's technical skills and drive the move to an information market. Building an information economy will make all the companies in the country more competitive. The Information Age benefits from having more people involved. As more and more countries join in, the importance increases for all countries. World trade will be done digitally.

	No government can put a fully digital approach in place immediately, but every government can begin now with strong first steps that benefit citizens and make them feel that the government is working for them. The main principle should be that citizens should never again have to fill out lots of forms or go to lots of places to get information.

	As one government official said in conversation about his new website, which lets people download a hundred years of county records online, "People can tell when you're trying to help. They know the difference between a government agency trying to help them and one that's just getting in the way."



	Create connected learning communities.



	PCs can give more power to teachers and students than any other group of knowledge workers. Students are pure "knowledge workers," since learning is all about acquiring knowledge. Teachers will be able to use the Internet to share with each other and to allow students to explore a subject in new ways. With a solid infrastructure in place, some schools are already benefiting from PCs in the classroom. Many schools struggle to find the resources for these new tools, but clever programs have shown that there are rewards for the effort.

	The success of PCs as educational tools requires teacher involvement. Without teacher training and making PCs central to the teaching program, they will not have a big effect. Many PCs have gone into computer "laboratories" where they sit, seldom used. Schools need to shift from treating the PC as a subject - teaching about technology -to including it in all areas of the teaching program: teaching with technology. More and more schools are now showing that PCs used as learning tools can have a strong influence.

	In the Western Heights Independent School District, just west of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, teachers were enthusiastic when the district provided training the summer before it introduced PCs. More than 200 of its 230 teachers signed up. Most teachers have a great love of learning and they'll get excited about anything that will help kids learn. What teachers don't want is to be thrown into something they have not had the opportunity to learn about and become comfortable with.

	Western Heights is a small, seven-school district with a moderate industrial tax base. The student population contains a mix of cultures. About 65 percent of the kids qualify for free or reduced-cost school lunches because they come from homes with lower incomes. This is not the school district that you might expect to lead the advance into the Information Age. But in the past three years the district has voted three times to spend a total of more than $6.8 million in local funds to create maybe the leading technology - based teaching program in the country. The community sees the investment as the only way to break the cycle of poverty that could trap these children if they go unprepared into the digital world.

	A PC can be a powerful new teaching tool for teachers. They find they can make kids more interested in lessons by including photos, films, and links to Internet pages. One teacher at Western Heights starts his class each day with fresh news from the Internet. PCs are part of each teacher's life in class at Western Heights. Teachers also use e-mail to communicate with one another about common issues. They don't have to wait for the district meetings that occur a couple of times a year. They can reach out to fellow teachers with questions and get answers back quickly.

	"People may not realize how alone teachers are in the classroom," Joe Kitchens of the Schools Department at Western Heights says. "Most teachers remain behind closed doors all day. They have little time for sharing experiences or interacting with other teachers. There are only a few times a year when they can gather together. E-mail stops them being isolated." Kitchens also jokes that teachers are able to complain to him more than before. They expect him to answer their questions immediately over e-mail.

	An important way to take advantage of investing in technology is to use the school infrastructure to benefit the entire community. Basic computer skills are one type of education that can be applied in any job. In most countries, one out of every ten information technology (IT) jobs is not filled. The United States and Europe each need more than half a million new trained IT professionals in the next several years. Rapidly developing areas such as India and Latin America may have greater shortages.

	Highdown School in Reading, England, is paying for the infrastructure it needs through a mix of private and public money. Highdown School expects the community to contribute. Adults can get online technical training either at the Reading schools, which open on evenings and weekends for that purpose, or at home. Fees for this service go toward maintaining and expanding the IT system.

	Most knowledge workers in the United States have their own PC, but even at the best of schools there are usually more than seven students for every PC. It's expensive for schools to buy PCs for every student, especially when PCs become out-of-date every three years or so. For this reason there's a fear that the gap between the "haves" - those families that can afford PCs at home-and the "have-nots"-those that cannot afford PCs at home - will create a major gap in opportunities. Creative approaches in providing PCs to every student are beginning to help solve this problem.

	One project started in the early 1990s in Melbourne, Australia, where Bruce Dixon, a teacher interested in technology, saw significant differences in teaching results when he could use half a dozen computers for his classes instead of just one. He realized that, for the best results, students had to use PCs as a tool for all their work - in all their classes and at home as well as at school.

	Out of many meetings came the idea of having all the students finance their own machines. Dixon, by then a technology advisor, worked out a financial plan. For a monthly fee, students get a machine and software. The seller provides service, and when the student graduates the family keeps the machine. It's still difficult for all families to afford the fees. Families that are wealthier can afford the typical forty-dollar monthly fee over a three-year period. Many families can afford to pay a small amount. Business and community organizations can make up the difference. Whatever the amount, the family contribution is basic to this program, as it gives the students and their parents a sense of owning and being responsible for the computer and for its role in the students' education.

	Programs like this have spread to schools all over the world. The effects have been impressive. A recent report shows that students who regularly use computers gain many skills. They write more often and better; they have better analysis skills; they express themselves more creatively; they work more independently, and they are better at problem solving and critical thinking.



	One of the most forward-looking ideas is to use PCs to offer a variety of ways to learn. About fifty different major theories attempt to describe individual learning styles. Most of the theories identify similar qualities. In the simplest terms, some people learn better by reading, some by listening, some by watching someone else do a task, some by doing the task. Most of us learn by a mix of all of these methods. And all people have different levels of ability and different personalities and life experiences that affect how well they learn. New software is helping students learn, whatever their learning style or ability. Software can present information in many different forms that can be adapted to the individual student much more easily than paper methods.

	PCs can help change the learning experience from the traditional approach - a teacher talking at the front of a classroom, with reading tasks - to a more hands-on approach that takes advantage of the natural curiosity of students of all ages. PCs enable students to explore information at their own speed, to learn from sound and pictures as well as from text, to do experiments, and to work together with other students.

	PCs are the primary tools for working and communicating in the digital age. The PC and the Internet change one thing completely: they provide every student in every school and community with information and ways of working that, before now, were not available even to students at the best schools. Educators will take advantage of that to help their communities. PCs are a new teaching and learning tool, and educators who use them will be the agents of change.



	Chapter five

	Expect the Unexpected

	Prepare for the digital future

	Customers are the main people who benefit from the increased efficiency of information technology, and the benefits will increase as the economy becomes more digital. The other people who benefit are business people who take advantage of digital methods faster than their competitors. The solutions I have talked about in this book are the result of the vision and leadership of business people who used IT to serve their customers better.

	Business leaders who succeed will take advantage of a new way of doing business, a way based on the increasing speed of information. The new way is not to apply technology for its own sake, but to use it to change how companies act. To get the full benefit of technology, business leaders will make their processes and their organizations simpler and more modern. The goal is to make business responses nearly immediate, and to make strategic thought a process that goes on all the time - not something that's done every twelve to eighteen months, separate from the daily flow of business.

	New technology should provide better information to every worker who might possibly use it. Knowledge workers are the brains of the company. If they're disconnected from the company's important data, how can they work, how can they take responsibility? You can give people tasks and authority, but without information they can't do anything. Knowledge is the best power tool. If important information about production systems, product problems, customer crises and opportunities, lost sales, and other important business news gets through the organization in minutes instead of days, and if the right people can be working on the issues within hours instead of days, a business obtains a huge advantage. This change in the structure of processes is more important than any other change since mass production.

	Every company can choose whether to lead or follow the digital trends. The Internet is changing the basis of industries in real time. Winning is not easy. Digital information flow and giving power to employees is part of achieving and maintaining competitive advantage. A belief in giving people power is the key to getting the most out of a digital nervous system. Knowledge workers and business managers benefit from more and better information, not just senior management. When employees get a couple of good tools that deliver better results, they demand more. It's a positive cycle.

	However you organize your company, one thing is clear: it is impossible to manage a company totally from the center. It is impossible for a single person or group of people to stay on top of every issue in every area of a business. Leaders need to provide planning and direction and to give employees tools that enable them to gather information and understanding from around the world. Companies that try to direct every action from the center will simply not be able to move fast enough to cope with the speed of the new economy.

	In business the argument between central authority and the individual is the difference between the old-style way of thinking, which saw workers as lazy people who needed to be controlled, and the theory that workers are creative and should be given responsibility. Digital processes support the idea that workers can - and will - do more if allowed, enabled, and encouraged to think and act.

	This argument about the center and the individual is not just academic. The choice affects the design of companies and systems. The design of the first manned space ship shocked the original pilots years ago. There were no manual flight controls. Don't worry, said the scientists. The system would fly the ship. The pilots, like the monkeys before them, were just there for the ride. The pilots resisted. They all had experience of "advanced" systems that failed when things got difficult. The pilots won, and on several flights the pilots' skill brought them home safely when the central, programmed system failed. The issue is not whether computers can fly better than pilots. Today planes and space ships use large amounts of computer technology to extend the human ability to fly. The issue is whether someone "at the center," away from the real circumstances, can possibly predict all of the things that can change or go wrong - whether in space or in a business office.

	Many parts of business can be improved through digital systems, but it will take a number of years to improve every single part. Every bit of data in a company should be in digital form, and easy to find, including every file, every record, every piece of e-mail, every webpage. Every internal process should be digital and connected to every other process. Every operation with partners and customers should be digital. You should allow partners and customers to have all the data that is appropriate to them, and they should do the same for you.

	Human beings are not the biggest animals, the strongest or fastest, or the sharpest in sight or smell. We survived and grew successful because of our brains. We learned how to use tools, to build shelter, to invent agriculture, to keep farm animals, to develop civilization and culture, to cure and prevent disease. Our tools and technologies have helped us to shape the environment around us.

	I'm a positive person. I believe in progress. I'd much rather be alive today than at any time in history - and not just because in an earlier age my skills wouldn't have been as valuable and I'd have been a good candidate for an animal's dinner. The tools of the Industrial Age extended the capacities of our muscles. The tools of the digital age extend the capacities of our minds. I'm even happier for my children, who will grow up in this new world.

	By joining the digital age enthusiastically, we can accelerate the positive effects and do better with the challenges, such as privacy and the problem of "haves" and "have-nots." If we sit back and wait for the digital age to come to us on terms defined by others, we won't be able to do either. The Web lifestyle can increase the involvement of citizens in government. Many of the decisions that need to be made are political and social, not technical. These include how we make sure that everyone can get on the Web and how we protect children. Citizens in every culture must join in the discussion about the effects of digital technology, to make sure that the new digital age reflects the society they want to create.

	The digital world certainly makes it tough and uncertain for business, but we will all benefit. We're going to get improved products and services, better responses to complaints, lower costs, and more choices. We're going to get better government and social services that cost a lot less. This world is coming. A big part of it comes through businesses using a digital nervous system to improve their processes. A digital nervous system can help business define itself and its role in the future, but success or failure depends on business leaders. Only you can prepare your organization and invest in ways that take advantage of the rapidly dawning digital age.

	Digital tools extend the abilities that make us unique in the world: the ability to think, the ability to express our thoughts, the ability to work together to act on those thoughts. I strongly believe that if companies give their employees the power to solve problems, and give them powerful tools to do this with, they will always be amazed at how much creative and independent thinking will appear.





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	Chapter one

	The View from the Window

	At the first light of dawn, flies began gathering around Inman's eyes and the long wound in his neck. Their touch woke him immediately. He brushed them away and looked across to the big window that faced his bed. During the day, he could see to the red road and the low brick wall. And beyond them to the fields and woods that stretched away to the west. But it was too early still for such a view, and only a gray light showed.

	Inman rose and dressed and sat in a straight-backed chair, putting the shadowy room of beds and broken men behind him. Once again he looked through the window. It was as tall as a door, and he had imagined many times that it would open onto some other place and let him walk through and be there. During his first weeks in the hospital, when he had hardly been able to move his head, he had at least been able to watch out the window and picture the old green places he remembered from home. Childhood places. The corner of a field where long grasses grew. The branch of a tree on which he had often sat, watching his father drive cows home in the evening.

	By now he had stared at the window all through a late summer so hot and wet that tiny black mushrooms grew overnight from the pages of his book. Inman suspected that the gray window had finally said all it had to say. This morning, though, it surprised him, because it brought him a lost memory of sitting in school beside a similar tall window, looking out over fields and low green hills to the great height of Cold Mountain.

	It was September. The teacher was a round little man, hairless and pink-faced. He talked through the morning about history, teaching the older students about grand wars fought in ancient England. After ignoring him for a time, the young Inman had taken his hat from under his desk and thrown it through the window. It flew high in the air and landed at the edge of a field. The teacher saw what Inman had done and told him to get it and to come back and be beaten. Inman never knew why he did what he did, but he stepped out the door, put the hat on his head, and walked away. He never returned.

	The memory passed as the day grew lighter. Inman thought, as he often did, of how he had received his wound during fighting outside Petersburg, in the state of Virginia. When his two closest friends had pulled away his clothes and looked at his neck, they had said a sad goodbye. "We'll meet again in a better world," they said. The doctors at the local hospital had also expected him to die. After two days they had sent him on to a hospital in North Carolina, his own state. There, the doctors looked at him and said that there was not much they could do. He might live or he might not. But slowly, the wound had started to heal.

	Inman thought of the battles he had fought in, in this terrible civil war-Malvern Hill, Sharpsburg, Petersburg. Fredericksburg was another battle he would never forget. He thought back to how the fog had lifted that morning to show a great army marching uphill toward a stone wall. Inman had joined the men who were already behind the wall. They were well-protected there, as you could stand up comfortably and still be in the shelter of the wall, while the Federals had to come uphill across open ground. It was a cold day, and the mud of the road was nearly frozen. The men let the Federals come very near before shooting them down. From behind the wall, Inman could hear the sound of bullets hitting meat. Thousands of Federals marched toward the wall all through the day, climbing the hill to be shot down. Inman started hating them for their stupid desire to die.

	Late in the afternoon, the Federals had stopped attacking and the shooting slowly stopped. Thousands of men lay dead and dying on the hillside below the wall. The men on Inman's side who had no boots had climbed over the wall to pull the boots off the dead. That night Inman, too, went out onto the battlefield. The Federals lay on the ground in bloody piles, body parts everywhere. Inman's only thought, looking on the enemy, was, "Go home." He saw a man killing a group of badly wounded Federals by striking them on the head with a hammer. The man did it without anger, just moving from one to another, whistling softly.

	Now, in the hospital, Inman often dreamed that the bloody pieces-arms, heads, legs-slowly came together and formed bodies whose parts did not match. They waved bloody arms, speaking the names of their women or singing lines of a song again and again. One figure, whose wounds were so terrible that he looked more like a piece of meat than a man, tried to rise but could not. He lay still but turned his head to stare at Inman with dead eyes, and spoke Inman's name in a low voice. Every morning after that dream, Inman woke in the blackest of moods.

	***

	Some days later, Inman walked from the hospital into town. His neck hurt very badly but his legs felt strong, and that worried him. As soon as he was strong enough to fight, they would send him back to Virginia. He decided that he must be careful not to look too fit in front of a doctor.

	Money had come from home and he had also received his pay from the army, so he walked through the streets and bought various things that he needed-a black woolen suit that fitted him perfectly, a black hat, strong boots, two knives, a little pot and cup, bullets for his pistol. Tired, he stopped at a coffee house and slowly drank a cup of something that was supposed to be coffee. He sat with his back straight, looking stiff and uncomfortable in his black suit, with the white bandage on his neck.

	Inman picked up the newspaper he had bought, hoping to find something to interest him. On the third page he found a notice from the state government stating that deserters would be hunted down by an organization called the Home Guard. In another part of the paper he read that the Cherokee Indians* had been fighting the Federals. Inman put the paper down and wondered if his Cherokee friend, Swimmer, was among the men who were fighting. He had met Swimmer the summer they were both sixteen. Inman had been given the job of looking after some cows on Balsam Mountain. He had joined a group of men camping there, and after a few days a band of Cherokee Indians had camped a short distance away.

	The Indians spent a lot of time playing a fast and dangerous ball game, and Swimmer had come over and invited the white men to play. The two groups had camped side by side for two weeks, the younger men playing the ball game most of the day. They spent the night drinking and telling stories by the fireside, eating great piles of freshly caught fish.

	There in the highlands, the weather was almost always clear, and the view stretched across rows of blue mountains. Once, Swimmer had looked out over the mountains and said he believed Cold Mountain to be the chief mountain of the world. Inman asked how he knew that to be true, and Swimmer had simply replied, "Do you see a bigger one?"

	In the mornings, when fog lay low in the valleys, Inman used to walk down to a cove to fish with Swimmer for an hour or two. There, Swimmer talked in a low voice, telling stories of animals and how they became as they are. He told of ways to cause sickness or death, how to protect a traveler on the road at night, and how to make the road seem short. Swimmer saw man's spirit as a weak thing, constantly under attack, always threatening to die inside you.

	After many days, the weather turned wet and the two camps separated. Thinking of Swimmer now, Inman hoped that his friend was not out fighting Federals but living in a hut by a rushing stream.

	He raised his coffee cup to his lips and found it cold and nearly empty. Inman guessed that Swimmer was right to say that a man's spirit could die while his body continued living. Inman felt that his spirit had been burned out of him, but he was still walking. He felt as dead as a tree that had been hit by lightning.

	As Inman sat thinking of his loss, one of Swimmer's stories rushed into his memory. Swimmer claimed that above the blue sky there was a forest where a heavenly race lived. Men could not go there to stay and live, but in that high land a dead spirit could be reborn. Swimmer said that the tops of the highest mountains reached into this healing place. Now, as he sat in the coffee house, Cold Mountain came to Inman's mind as a place where his spirit might be healed. He could not bear the idea that this world was all that there was. So he held to the idea of another world, a better world, and he thought that Cold Mountain was probably a good place for it.

	Inman took off his new coat and started working on a letter. It was long, and as the afternoon passed he drank several more cups of coffee. This was part of what he wrote:

	I am coming home and I do not know how things are between us. Do you remember that night before Christmas four years ago when you told me that you would like to sit there forever and rest your head on my shoulder? Now I am sure that if you knew what I have seen and done, it would make you fear to do the same again.

	Inman stood up and folded the letter. He put his hand up to the wound in his neck. The doctors claimed he was healing quickly, but it still hurt to talk and to eat, and sometimes to breathe. But on the walk down the street to mail the letter and then back out to the hospital, his legs felt surprisingly strong and willing.

	After supper, Inman checked the knapsack under his bed. There was a blanket already in the bag and to these he added the cup and little pot and the knives. The knapsack had for some time been filled with hardtack, salt pork, a little dried beef, and some cornmeal.

	He got in bed and pulled up the covers. Tired from his day of walking about town, Inman read only for a short time before falling asleep. He woke sometime deep in the night. The room was black and the only sounds were of men breathing and moving about in their beds. He rose and dressed in his new clothes. Then he put on his knapsack and went to the tall open window and looked out. Fog moved low on the ground, though the sky was clear. He stepped out of the window.



	Chapter two

	Ada Monroe

	Ada sat in the porch of the house that was now hers, writing a letter. Putting the point of the pen in ink, she wrote:

	This you must know: although you have been away for so long, I will never hide a single thought from you. I believe it is our duty to be honest with each other and unlock our hearts.

	She blew the paper to dry it and then carefully read her letter. She decided that she did not like what she had written and threw the letter away. Aloud she said, "That is just the way people talk. It means nothing."

	She looked over to the kitchen garden, where tomatoes and beans grew that were hardly bigger than her thumb, although it was the growing season. Many of the leaves were eaten away by insects. Beyond the failed garden lay the old cornfield, now grown wild. Above the fields, the mountains showed faintly through the morning fog.

	Ada sat waiting for the mountains to show themselves clearly.

	The house and gardens were now in a terrible condition and Ada felt comforted that at least the mountains were as they should be. Since her father's funeral, Ada had done hardly any work on the farm. She had at least milked Waldo, the cow, and fed Ralph, the horse, but she had not done much more because she did not know how to do much more. She had left the chickens to look after themselves and they had grown thin and wild, and it had become more and more difficult to find their eggs.

	Cookery was now a real problem for Ada. She was constantly hungry, having eaten little through the summer except milk, fried eggs, salads, and tiny tomatoes. She had been unable to make butter. She wanted to eat a chicken dish followed by a cake, but had no idea how to prepare such a meal.

	Ada rose and started looking for eggs. She searched everywhere but found nothing. Remembering that a red hen sometimes sat in the big bushes on either side of the front steps, she went to one of the bushes and tried to look inside it. Folding her skirt tightly around her, she went on her hands and knees into the empty space in the center of the bush. There were no eggs there, but as she sat there she was reminded of times in her childhood when she and her cousin Lucy had hidden in bushes like this one. Looking up through the leaves at the pale sky, Ada realized that she wished never to leave this fine shelter. When she thought about what had happened to her recently, she wondered how her father had allowed her to grow up so impractical.

	She had grown up in Charleston, and her father had given her an education far better than most young girls received. She had become a clever, loving daughter, filled with opinions on art and politics and literature. She could speak French and Latin quite well, and spoke a little Greek. She was able to sew and play the piano and was talented at painting and drawing. She read a lot. But none of these things helped her now, as the owner of a mediumsized farm, and she had no idea how to look after it.

	All her life, Ada's father had kept her away from hard work. He had hired workers to help on the farm, and a man and his part- Cherokee Indian wife to help in the house, so that Ada only had to plan the weekly menus. She had therefore been free to spend her time reading, sewing, drawing, and practicing her music. But now the hired people were gone, leaving Ada to manage on her own.

	Suddenly, the red hen came flying through the leaves, followed by the big black and gold rooster. He looked at her with his shining black eyes for a moment, then flew at her face. Ada threw up a hand to protect herself and was cut across the wrist. She knocked the bird to the ground but he flew at her again, and she escaped from the bush with the rooster scratching at her legs. She hit the bird until it fell away, and ran into the house, where she sank into an armchair and examined her wounds. There was blood on her wrist and scratches on her leg, and her skirt was torn. This is the place I have reached, she thought. I am living in a world where this is your reward for looking for eggs.

	She rose and climbed the stairs to her room, removed her clothes, and washed. Finding no clean clothes, she took some from near the bottom of the dirty clothes pile. She wondered how to get through the hours until bedtime. Since the death of her father, Monroe, she had sorted out his things, his clothes and papers, but that was all she had done. Now, at the end of each empty day, the answer to the question, "What have you achieved today?" was always, "Nothing."

	Ada took a book from her bedside table and went to sit in the upper hall in her father's old armchair by the window, where the light was good. She had spent much of the past three months sitting in the armchair reading. She liked the fact that when she looked up from the page, she could see the fields and mountains, and the great height of Cold Mountain above them all. It had been a wet summer and the mountains, with their fogs, clouds, and gray rain, were very different from her home town of Charleston.

	She began to read, but could not stop thinking about food. She had not yet eaten breakfast, although it would soon be time for lunch. She went down to the kitchen and spent nearly two hours trying to make a loaf of bread. But when the loaf came out of the oven, it looked like badly made hardtack. Ada tried a piece, then threw it outside for the chickens. For lunch she ate only a plate of the little tomatoes and two apples.

	Leaving her dirty plate and fork on the table, Ada went to the porch and stood looking. The sky was cloudless. She walked down the path a little way and turned onto the river road, picking wild flowers as she went. In fifteen minutes she reached the little church that had been Monroe's responsibility. Ada climbed the hill and went behind the church and stood beside Monroe's grave. She put the flowers on the ground and picked up the previous bunch, now wet and dying.

	The day Monroe had died was in May. Late that afternoon, Ada had prepared to go out for a time to paint the flowers by the stream. As she left the house, she stopped to speak to Monroe, who sat reading a book under the apple tree in the yard. He seemed tired and said he would sleep, and asked her to wake him when she returned.

	Ada was away for less than an hour. As she walked from the fields into the yard, she saw that he was lying with his mouth open. She walked up to wake him, but as she approached she could see that his eyes were open, his book fallen into the grass. She ran the last three steps and put her hand to his shoulder to shake him, but she knew immediately that he was dead.

	Ada went as fast as she could for help, running and walking to her nearest neighbors, the Swangers. They were members of her father's church, and Ada had known them from her earliest days in the mountains. She reached their house breathless and crying. It had started raining, and when she and Esco Swanger got back to the cove, Monroe's body was wet and leaves had fallen on his face.

	She had spent the night in the Swanger's house, lying awake and dry-eyed, longing for her dead father.

	Two days later, she had buried Monroe on the little hill above the Pigeon River. The morning was bright and windy. Forty people, dressed in black, nearly filled the little church. Three or four men talked of Monroe's fine qualities, his small acts of kindness, and his wise advice. Esco Swanger spoke of Ada and her terrible loss, of how she would be missed when she returned to her home in Charleston.

	Then, later, they had all stood and watched the burial. Afterward, Sally Swanger had taken Ada by the elbow and walked with her down the hill.

	"You stay with us until you can arrange to go back to Charleston," she said.

	Ada stopped and looked at her. "I will not be returning to Charleston immediately," she said. "I will be staying at Black Cove, at least for a time."

	Mrs. Swanger stared at her. "How will you manage?" she asked.

	"I'm not sure," Ada said.

	"You're not going up to that big dark house by yourself today. Take dinner with us and stay until you're ready to leave."

	"I would be grateful," said Ada.

	She had stayed with the Swangers for three days and then returned to the empty house, frightened and alone. It was a brave decision, as the war was not going well for the southern states. The Federals were just over the mountains to the north, and according to the newspapers, things were growing desperate in Virginia. People worried that the Federals would soon come south looking for food, take what they wanted, and leave people with nothing. Everyone in town knew how the Feds had robbed a family, taking every animal and piece of food they could find, and setting fire to the henhouse as they left.

	The Home Guard was as bad or worse. The story was that

	Teague and his men had thrown a family called the Owens out into their yard at dinnertime. Teague claimed they were known to be lovers of the Federals. First they searched the house, and then they examined the yard to see if they could find soft dirt from fresh digging. They hit the man and later hit his wife. Then they hanged a pair of dogs, tied the woman's thumbs together behind her back, and pulled her up by them with a rope thrown over a tree. But the man still wouldn't say where he had hidden the silver.

	A white-headed boy called Birch had said he believed that maybe they should stop and leave. But Teague pointed a pistol at him and said, "I won't be told how to treat these people. I'll do exactly what I like." In the end, they didn't kill anybody and didn't find the silver either, but just lost interest and left.

	***

	Walking back home from her father's grave, Ada stopped to rest by a rock that had a view of the river valley. She looked up toward Cold Mountain, pale and gray and distant, then down into Black Cove. She knew that if she stayed, she would need help, but she doubted that she could find anyone, since all the men fit to work were fighting in the war. She sat and looked down at the farm. It seemed a mystery to her that she owned the farm, though she could say exactly how it had happened.

	She and her father had come to the mountains six years earlier, hoping to find a cure for the illness that was slowly destroying Monroe, so that he coughed up blood each day. His Charleston doctor had recommended living in the mountains, and Monroe had found a mountain church that needed a preacher.

	They had set off immediately, traveling first by train to Spartanburg, where they had stayed for several days, and then by horse and carriage. They had left Spartanburg in the hour before dawn, and had traveled all through the day, through land that climbed higher and higher. As the day went on, Ada became certain that the road would disappear completely, leaving them lost in a wild country. Monroe, however, was excited and from time to time spoke poetry aloud. Ada had laughed and kissed him, thinking that she would follow him anywhere. It was long after midnight when they came to a dark little church on a hill above the road and a river. They went in out of the rain and lay down in their wet clothes. The next morning Monroe rose stiffly and walked outside. Ada heard him laugh and then say, "My God, I thank you once again." She went to him. He stood in front of the church, laughing and pointing above the door. She turned and read the sign: Cold Mountain Church.

	"We have arrived home," Monroe said.

	In the weeks that followed their arrival, Ada and Monroe had visited members of the church and others who they hoped would join it. People seemed distant and quite cold. Only the men would come out to meet them, and sometimes Monroe and Ada would be invited in and sometimes not. When they were invited inside, the men looked at the fire and did not speak. When Monroe asked a direct question, often they just looked at him. There were hidden people in the house-women, children, and old people-but they never introduced themselves. To Ada, these people seemed to care nothing at all for the things she and Monroe knew. These mountain people clearly saw life very differently.

	But Monroe and Ada remained at the church, living in a little riverside house that belonged with it. Then, when Monroe's health improved and people seemed to be accepting him, Monroe sold the Charleston house and bought the cove from the Black family. He liked the way the land was flat and open at the bottom of the cove, and he liked the wooded hillsides that rose from the farm toward Cold Mountain, and the ice cold water from the stream. And he especially liked the house he had built there, with its big porch all across the front, and the great fireplace in the sitting room. When he bought the cove, the place had been a farm, but

	Monroe did not bother to manage the farm well, since he had put his money into rice and cotton and did not need to grow his own food.

	Still seated by the rock, Ada took a letter from her pocket and began to read it. It was from her father's lawyer in Charleston, and in it he informed her that due to the war, Ada's income from rice and cotton had been reduced to almost nothing. Ada stood up, put the letter back in her pocket, and took the path down to Black Cove. She wondered how she would find the courage to hope. When she reached the old stone wall that marked the edge of the farm, she paused again. It was a lovely spot, one of her favorite corners of the farm. The wall went north to south, and on this sunny afternoon it was warm with afternoon sun. An apple tree grew near it, and a few early apples had fallen into the tall grass. Ada thought it was the most peaceful place she had ever known. She settled herself against the wall, took her book from her pocket and began reading, until eventually she fell asleep in the long grass.

	When she woke, it was dark, and a half-moon stood high in the sky. She had never spent a night in the woods alone, but she was less frightened than she expected. She sat for hours watching the progress of the moon across the sky, until the first gray light appeared. In her mind, she considered the possibilities again and again. They were few. If she tried to sell Black Cove and return to Charleston, the little money she would receive would not last long. After a time, she would have to live with friends of her father, probably as a teacher to their children.

	It was that or marry. But the thought of returning to Charleston in order to hunt for a man disgusted her. She tried to see herself saying to someone that she loved him, when she actually meant that she needed his money. But she could not imagine the marriage act with such a man.

	She knew that if she returned to Charleston under these conditions, she could not expect people to welcome her, because in the opinion of Charleston society she had refused too many men who had shown an interest in her. She had told too many of her friends that these men bored her and that marriage was not a woman's only purpose in life. As a result, many people thought that she was very strange. In the year before they had moved to the mountains, Ada had lost many friends. So even now, the idea of returning to Charleston was a bitter thought. There was nothing pulling her back and she had no family there.

	And although she was an outsider, this place, the blue mountains, seemed to be holding her where she was. The only thought that left her any hope of happiness was this: the land that she could see around her was her own, belonged to her.

	She returned to the house in the early morning, and was sitting in the porch some hours later, wondering what her next action should be, when she saw a figure come walking up the road. It was a girl, a short one, thin as a chicken neck except across the lower half of her body, where she was quite wide. The girl came up to the porch and, without asking permission, sat in the chair next to Ada. She wore a blue, square-necked dress made of cheap cloth.

	"Sally Swanger said you're in need of help," she said.

	Ada examined the girl carefully. She was a dark thing, with a thin chest but strong-looking arms. She had a broad nose and her hair was black and thick. Big dark eyes, no shoes, clean feet.

	"Mrs. Swanger is right. I do need help," Ada said, "but I need help with the farm. It's rough work and I believe I need a man for the job."

	"Number one," the girl said, "if you have a horse, I can plow all day. Number two, every man worth hiring has gone to fight."

	The girl's name, Ada soon discovered, was Ruby, and after talking for a time, Ada began to think that Ruby was strong enough to work on the farm. Just as importantly, as they talked, Ada liked Ruby and felt that she had a willing heart. And though

	Ruby could not read a word or even write her name, Ada thought she saw in her something hard and bright. And they shared this: Ruby was a motherless child from the day she was born. In a short time, and to Ada's surprise, they came to an agreement.

	Ada said, "At the moment, and possibly for some months, I have very little money."

	"Money isn't important," Ruby said. "Sally said you needed help, and she was right. But I don't want to be your servant. I'm saying, if I'm going to help you here, both of us must understand that."

	As they talked, the black and gold rooster walked by the porch and paused to stare at them.

	"I hate that bird," Ada said. "He attacked me."

	Ruby said, "I wouldn't keep a bird that did that to me."

	"But how can I get rid of it?" Ada said.

	Ruby looked at her in surprise. She rose and quickly seized the rooster, put his body under her left arm, and with her right hand pulled off his head. He struggled for a minute and then went still. Ruby threw the head into a bush.

	"He'll need cooking for quite a time," she said.

	By dinnertime the meat of the rooster was falling from the bones, and bread was baking in the oven.



	Chapter three

	The Journey Begins

	It was dawn and the golden sunlight shone down on a tall man in a black hat, with a knapsack on his back, walking west. After the lonely, wet nights he had recently spent, Inman felt half-dead. He stopped and put his boot on the roadside fence, and looked out across the fields. He tried to greet the day with a thankful heart, but he hated this flat land, with its red dirt and bad smell. The wound in his neck felt freshly raw and hurt badly. He put a finger underneath the bandage, and to his surprise realized that the wound had healed over and was no longer a deep red hole.

	He calculated that although he had been walking for some days, he had not traveled a great distance from the hospital. His wound forced him to walk slowly and rest more often than he wished. He was very tired and also rather lost, still trying to find a route that went directly toward his home in the Appalachian mountains. But the country consisted of small farms, all cut up by tiny paths that crossed each other, with no signs to say where they were going. He kept feeling that he had been led further south than he wanted. And the weather had been bad, with rain that came suddenly, with thunder and lightning, day and night. Each farm had two or three dogs and he was often forced to fight off their attacks. The dogs and the danger of the Home Guard meant that he was always nervous traveling through the dark nights.

	The previous night had been the worst. He had heard the sound of horses and had climbed a tree and watched as a pack of Home Guard came by, searching for men like him to seize and beat and return to the army. When he had climbed down and begun walking again, every tree seemed to have the shape of a man, and once he aimed his pistol at a bush that looked like a fat man with a big hat.

	That long night finished, his greatest desire now was to climb over the fence, walk out across the fields into the woods, and sleep. But having at last reached open country, he needed to move on, so he took his foot off the fence and continued walking. The sun climbed the sky and turned hot, and all the insect world seemed interested in Inman's body. In the afternoon he came to a small village with a store and a few houses. Inman decided to risk going to the store to buy food. He put his pistol into his blanket roll in order to look harmless and not attract attention.

	Two men sitting on the porch hardly looked up as he climbed the steps. One man was hatless, with his hair standing up on his head. The other man, who wore a cap, was studying a newspaper. Leaning against the wall behind him was an expensive gun. Inman wondered what men like these were doing with such a good gun. He walked past them into the store and they still did not look up. The store did not have much, but Inman bought cornmeal, a piece of cheese, some hardtack, and then he went out onto the porch. The two men were gone. Inman stepped down into the road to go on walking west, eating as he traveled. A pair of black dogs crossed the road in front of him.

	Then, as Inman came to the edge of the town, the two men who had been on the porch suddenly came from behind a house and stood in front of him. They were not big men, they were drunk, maybe, and seemed too confident.

	"Where are you going, you fool?" the man with the cap said.

	Inman said nothing. He finished his food with two big bites. Before the war he had never much liked fighting, but when he had joined the army, he had discovered that fighting was easy for him. He had decided that it was like any other thing, a gift. The two men jumped on him before he even had time to remove his pack. But Inman fought them off and beat both of them to the ground, so that they lay quiet, face down. Then the hatless man rolled over and pulled out a small pistol. Inman seized the pistol and beat the man on the head with it, threw it onto the roof of a building, and walked away.

	Outside the town, he turned into the woods and walked away from the road. All through the afternoon he continued west through the woods, stopping now and again to listen for anyone following. Sometimes he thought he heard voices in the distance, but they were faint and were probably his imagination. Night came, and as he walked, Inman's thoughts went back to his home in the mountains, and he remembered the day he first saw Ada.

	***

	Inman had attended church especially to see Ada. In the weeks following her arrival in Cold Mountain, he had heard much about her before he saw her. She and her father had caused a lot of amusement among the houses along the river road. People sat on the porch, as at the theater, eager to watch Ada and Monroe pass by in their carriage. All agreed that Ada was pretty, but they laughed at her Charleston clothes and hairstyles. If they saw her holding a flower in order to admire its color, or bending to touch a leaf, some called her mad. People could not understand her habit of staring at a thing-bird, or bush, sunset, mountain-and then scratching at a piece of paper with her pen.

	So one Sunday morning Inman dressed himself carefully-in a new black suit, white shirt, black tie, black hat-and went to church to take a look at Ada. It had rained and the road was muddy, so that he arrived late and had to take a seat at the back. He could only see the backs of people's heads, but he recognized Ada immediately, since her dark hair was twisted up on her head in a style that was not known in the mountains. A few fine curls lay on her soft neck, and all through the church service, Inmans eyes remained on her white skin. After a while, even before he saw her face, he wanted to press two fingers against the back of her neck.

	That morning Monroe preached, as he often did, about the question that worried him most: Why was man born to die? He had no real answer, and people had become bored with his constant questioning. Inman sat staring at Ada's neck, not really listening to Monroe's words, waiting for him to finish.

	When the service ended, the men and women left the church by separate doors. The men lined up to shake hands with Monroe and then they all chatted with each other and discussed whether it would rain again. Ada stood on the edge of the group, looking foreign and beautiful and very uncomfortable. Everyone else wore warm woolen clothes, but she was wearing a light, cream-colored dress that did not suit the weather at all. The older women came to her and said things, and then there were embarrassed pauses and they walked away.

	"If I went and told her my name, do you think she'd answer me?" said a man who had come to church for exactly the same reason as Inman.

	"I couldn't say," Inman replied.

	"You haven't an idea how to begin talking to her," another man laughed.

	Inman walked away from the group towards Sally Swanger. "I'll do some work on your farm if you'll introduce me," he said.

	Sally laughed. "Notice I'm not even asking who to," she said.

	"Now's the time," Inman replied.

	Mrs. Swanger took Inman's black coat by the sleeve and pulled him across the yard to Ada. He raised his hand to take off his hat.

	"Miss Monroe," Sally Swanger said, her face bright, "Mr. Inman has asked to meet you. You've met his parents. His people built the church."

	Mrs. Swanger walked away and Ada looked Inman directly in the face. He realized too late that he had not planned what to say.

	"Yes?" said Ada. There was not much patience in her voice, and for some reason Inman was amused. He held his hat and looked into it, hoping for an idea.

	"You're free to put your hat back on, and say something," Ada said.

	"You know, people are very interested in you," said Inman.

	"A new experience, am I?" Ada asked.

	"No," Inman said.

	"Then what would you compare me to?"

	"Like picking up a thistle," Inman said.

	Ada smiled, liking the comparison. "Tell me this," she said. "A woman earlier said that it was sheep-killing weather. Did she mean it was good weather for killing sheep, or that this weather killed sheep?"

	"The first," Inman said.

	"Well, then, I thank you. You've been useful to me."

	She turned and walked away to her father. Inman watched her touch Monroe's arm and say something to him, and they went to the carriage and drove off.

	***

	Late in the night, Inman followed a rough road that ran along the banks of the Deep River. It soon went down into a gorge, with high rocks on either side, so that there was only a piece of sky above. It was so dark for a time that Inman had to feel with his feet for the soft dust of the road to find the way. He did not like his position and feared the Home Guard horsemen would find him before he could find a place to leave the road.

	Although it was painful, he started to run, and some minutes later he saw a light ahead. As he approached, he saw that a man was standing in the road, holding a lamp. Walking quietly, Inman came closer and stopped by a rock less than ten meters away. The man wore a suit of black clothes and a white shirt. He held a horse by a rope tied around its neck. In the light Inman could see that the horse carried something white across its back.

	"Lord, oh Lord!" the man cried. His whole body was shaking and he seemed desperate. Then he walked to the horse and lifted the white object off the animal, and Inman could see that he was carrying a woman, with her black hair brushing the ground. Inman realized that the man was taking her to the edge of the gorge. He could hear the man crying in the dark as he walked.

	Inman took out his pistol and ran along the road toward the man. "Put her down," he said.

	She dropped at the man's feet.

	"What pistol is that?" the man said.

	"Step away from her," Inman said. "Get over there where I can see you."

	The man stepped across the body and approached Inman. "You're a message from God saying no," the man said. He fell to his knees in the road and Inman saw that his face was shiny with tears. Inman hit him lightly with the pistol so that he fell in the road on his back.

	"You deserve to be killed," Inman said.

	"Don't kill me, I'm a preacher," the man replied.

	Inman showed his surprise.

	"Is she dead?" he asked.

	"No. She has a child inside her. And I gave her some powder to make her sleep for four hours."

	"Not married to her?"

	"No."

	Inman stepped over to the girl, put a hand to her dark head, and lifted it. She looked drugged, but he could see that she might be attractive.

	"Put her back on the horse," Inman said.

	The man did as he was told, and then said, "What now?"

	"Where did you come from?" Inman asked.

	"There's a town not far off," the man replied, pointing up the road in the direction Inman was going.

	"Walk in front of me and show me the way," Inman said.

	They started walking. Inman kept his pistol in one hand and led the horse with the other. The road soon started climbing through low hills. They walked in silence for some time, until finally the preacher said, "What do you intend doing with me?"

	"I'm thinking about it," Inman said. "How did you get into this trouble?"

	"It's hard to say. No one in town knows about us. She lives with her deaf old grandmother, and it was easy for her to come away at midnight and lie on a river bank with me until the first birds began to sing."

	"You were going to throw her into the gorge like a dead pig."

	"Well, yes, but I had to think about my position. If we had been found out, I would have been chased out of town. Believe me, I spent many nights worrying about what to do."

	"Why didn't you marry her?"

	"I had already asked another woman to marry me."

	"Then you shouldn't be a preacher," Inman said.

	They walked on and came to a small town on the river bank.

	"I'll tell you what we're going to do," Inman said. "We're going to put her back in her bed."

	They entered the town. "Which house?" Inman said.

	The preacher pointed down the road to a tiny house. When they reached it, Inman took the rope off the horse and tied the preacher by his neck to a tree.

	"Stand here quietly and we'll live through this," he said.

	He lifted the girl from the horse, with one arm under her waist and another under her soft legs. Her dark head rested helplessly on his shoulder. "I ought to kill him," Inman thought. He carried the girl to the house, put her down by a bush, and looked in through a window. An old lady slept on a bed by the fire, with her mouth open. The door was not locked and Inman put his head inside. "Hey," he said, but the old lady did not move. There was an empty bed at the end of the room, and Inman stepped outside, picked the girl up, and carried her to the bed. He pulled off her shoes and covered her to her chin. Then he left her and walked back out to where the preacher stood tied to the tree. He took pen and ink and paper from his knapsack, and found a place where the moonlight came through the trees. He wrote the story down, then put the paper in a tree branch where the preacher could not reach it.

	The preacher watched him and when he guessed what Inman was writing, he kicked at him with his feet.

	"You've ruined my life," he said.

	"Don't blame that on me," Inman said. "I don't want to have to wonder it you'll be back in that black gorge in a night or two with her lying on your horse again."

	"Then shoot me and leave me."

	"Don't think that I don't want to do that," Inman said as he walked away.



	Chapter four

	Ruby

	That first morning, Ada and Ruby agreed that Ruby would move to the cove and teach Ada how to manage a farm. There would be very little money involved in her pay. They would take most of their meals together, but Ruby did not want to live with anyone else and decided she would move into the old cabin near the house. After they had eaten their first dinner, Ruby went home and gathered her belongings. She came back to Black Cove with them, and seldom thought about the past again.

	The two women spent their first days together listing the things that needed doing. They walked together around the farm, Ruby looking around a lot, talking constantly. She had ideas about everything. The most urgent matter, she said, was to start a good vegetable garden. She suggested that they clear the old cornfield. She wanted more chickens and thought of buying a pig. She was delighted by the number of apple trees, and said that they could sell the apples in October. She was also pleased with the tobacco field. The tobacco plants were tall and strong, and she thought they could sell them in exchange for seed and salt and other things they could not produce themselves.

	When Ada told Ruby how little money she had, Ruby said, "I've never held a piece of money bigger than a dollar in my hand." Ruby's opinion was that they did not really need cash. Ruby had never felt comfortable with money, especially when she thought of how one could hunt, gather, and plant the things one needed. And it was true that now, with the war, money had lost so much value that it was hard to buy anything with it anyway. On their first trip together into town, they could not believe that they had paid five dollars for a small packet of needles. And the cloth that they wanted was priced at fifty dollars. Ruby said that if they had sheep they could make the cloth themselves. Ada could only think that it would take many days of hard work. Money made things so much easier.

	But even if they had it, store owners really didn't want money, since the value of it was likely to fall almost immediately. The general feeling was that paper money ought to be spent as soon as possible. It was wiser to exchange food and other goods. Ruby seemed to understand this.

	Ruby's plan was this: Ada should sell either the carriage or the piano. She believed she could exchange either one or the other for the things they would need to get through the winter. Ada thought about this for two days, and finally surprised herself by deciding to sell the piano. She did not play the piano particularly well, and it had been Monroe who had wanted her to learn. Also, she knew that she would have very little time for art in her future life and that she would spend most of the free time she had drawing and painting.

	After Ada had taken her decision, Ruby wasted no time. She knew who had extra animals and food, and she decided on Old Jones who lived up on East Fork, and whose wife had wanted the piano for some time. Ruby was a hard bargainer, and Jones was finally made to give a fine pig, half a dozen sheep, and large quantities of cornmeal, green vegetables, and smoked meat.

	In a few days, Ruby brought the pigs and the little sheep up into Black Cove. She took them to Cold Mountain to feed through the fall, and marked their ears with a knife to show who their owner was. Late one afternoon, Old Jones arrived with another man and took the piano away. Ada sat on the porch and watched it go. She did not feel much regret, but she thought about the party that Monroe had given four days before Christmas in the last winter before the war.

	***

	The chairs in the room had been pushed back against the wall to make space for dancing, and people who could play the piano each played for a short time. There were pretty lamps in glass bowls, a fashion that no one in the mountains had seen before. On the dining room table there were tiny cookies, cakes and brown bread, and sweet-smelling pots of tea.

	In the early evening, people sat and talked in groups of the same sex. Ada sat with the women but looked interestedly around the room. Six old men sat in chairs near the fire and discussed the worsening political situation. The sons of the most valued members of the church sat in a corner of the room and talked loudly. Women of mixed ages sat in another corner. Sally Swanger wore a new pair of fine shoes, and sat waiting for comments on them, holding her legs stiffly out in front of her. Later the groups mixed, and some stood around the piano and sang, and then some of the younger people danced.

	As the evening continued, Ada realized that she had had too much to drink. Her face felt hot and her neck was wet under her pretty green dress. Sally Swanger, who had also had too many glasses of wine, took Ada's arm and in a whisper said, "That Inman boy's just got here. I shouldn't say this, but you ought to marry him. The two of you'd make pretty brown-eyed babies."

	Ada had been shocked by the comment, and her face had gone bright red, so that she had to go to the kitchen to calm herself. But there she was surprised to find Inman alone, sitting in the stove corner. He had arrived late, having ridden through a slow winter rain, and he was warming up and drying out before joining the party. He wore a black suit and sat with his legs crossed.

	"Oh," Ada said. "There you are. The ladies are already so pleased to know you're here."

	"The old ladies?" Inman said.

	"Well, everyone. Mrs. Swanger is especially pleased by your arrival."

	This comment reminded Ada of Mrs. Swanger's words to her, and the blood rushed to her head.

	"Are you all right?" Inman asked.

	"Yes, but it's hot in here."

	Ada went to the door and opened it for a breath of cool air. Out from the dark, over a great distance, came the high lonely call of a wild dog.

	"That's a sad sound," Inman said.

	Ada closed the door and turned to Inman, but when she did the heat of the room, and the alcohol, and the soft look on Inman's face, made her feel faint. She took a few uncertain steps and when Inman half stood and put out a hand to steady her, she took it. And then, she didn't know how, she found herself in his lap. He put his hands on her shoulders for a moment, and she lay back with her head beneath his chin. Ada remembered thinking that she never wanted to leave this place, but did not realize that she had said it aloud. He seemed as content as she was and he moved his hands to her shoulders and held her there.

	She rested in his lap for half a minute, no more. Then she was up and away, and she remembered turning at the door to look back at him, where he sat with a puzzled smile on his face.

	Ada went back to the piano, where she played for quite some time. Inman eventually came and stood leaning against the door, watching her for a while before moving away to talk to a friend. Through the rest of the evening, neither Ada nor Inman mentioned what had taken place in the kitchen. They talked once, rather uncomfortably, and Inman left early.

	Ada sat on the porch for some minutes after the piano had gone. Then she and Ruby made and drank some real coffee. That morning Ada had discovered a large sack of green coffee beans in a dark corner of the barn. Over the next few days, they exchanged most of the coffee for sacks of salt, corn, potatoes and beans, and eight chickens. In these matters, Ruby was a ball of energy and she soon created a daily routine for herself and Ada. Each day before dawn she milked the cow, lit the fire in the kitchen, and made breakfast. Ada, who rarely got up before ten, started getting up at dawn, too, since Ruby obviously expected her to do so. The two young women ate breakfast together, while Ruby talked about her plans for the day.

	After breakfast was done, they worked constantly. On days when there was not one big thing to do, they did many small ones. That first month, Ruby made Ada understand that she needed to get her hands dirty if she wanted food on the table. She made Ada work when she did not want to, made her wear dirty clothes while she dug in the earth. She taught Ada how to turn cream into butter and how to cut the head off a chicken. And Ada did these things, because somewhere inside her, she knew that another person might walk away and let her fail. Ruby would not let her fail.

	The only moments of rest were after the supper dishes had been put away. Then Ada and Ruby sat on the porch and Ada read aloud. Then, when it became too dark to read, Ada closed the book and asked Ruby about herself. Over a period of weeks, she learned the story of Ruby's life.

	***

	Ruby had never known her mother, and her father, a man called Stobrod Thewes, had never had a job for more than a week or two. They lived in a cabin that had a dirt floor and no ceiling. On many mornings, Ruby had found snow on top of her bed cover when she woke. Stobrod did not look after their home, and in Ruby's opinion was little more than an animal.

	Ruby had to find her own food soon after she learned to walk, and was forced to depend on the kindness of the women on neighboring farms. One night, when Ruby was four, she was returning from a farm when her dress got caught in a bush. Ruby spent the night by the bush, unable to get away. She never forgot those dark hours. It was cold near the river, and she remembered shaking with cold and crying for many hours, calling out for help, frightened of the wild animals that might come and eat her. But later she was spoken to by a voice in the dark. She felt that a gentle spirit had come to look after her. She remembered every star pattern that passed across the sky and every word spoken directly to her heart by the calm voice that comforted and protected her all through the night.

	The next morning, a man found her and she walked home and never spoke a word to Stobrod about it. He did not ask where she had been. But she still heard the voice in her head, and after that night she seemed to know things that others had no idea about.

	As she got older, she and Stobrod had lived off what Ruby grew on their little bit of land. Her father, who loved to drink, often disappeared for many days, walking fifty kilometers for a party, or going off into the woods. So everyone was surprised when, in the first days of the war, Stobrod joined the army. He rode off one morning, and Ruby had not heard from him since. As he had taken the horse, Ruby could not even plow the land. The first year of the war had been hard for her, but she had fed herself by using Stobrod's gun to go hunting in the woods.

	At present, Ruby believed she was twenty-one years old, although Stobrod was not certain of either the year of her birth or the day. He could not even remember what season it had been when she arrived.



	Chapter five

	The Home Guard

	Inman walked through days of cooling weather, blue skies, and empty roads. He avoided towns and met few people, and the few he met were mainly slaves. The nights were warm and lit by big moons, and day after day passed with nothing much happening. As he walked, Inman often thought of Ada, and of one evening in particular, that Christmas four years ago when she had fallen into his lap.

	It seemed like another life, another world. He remembered her weight on his legs, her softness, and the sweet smell of her hair. She had leaned back and rested her head on his shoulder. Then she had sat up and he had put his hands on her shoulders. He had wanted to put his arms around her and hold her tight, but she had stood up and pulled at her skirt, and smoothed her hair.

	"Well," she had said. "Well."

	Inman had leaned forward, and taken her hand and put his lips to her wrist. Ada had slowly taken her hand away and then stood looking down at it.

	"That was unexpected," she said. Then she had walked away.

	He was thinking of her once more when, one day in the early afternoon, he saw a figure in the distance behind him, walking fast. Inman waited until he came to a bend in the road, then he went into the woods and hid behind a tree trunk.

	Soon, the walker came around the bend. He had no hair, and wore a long gray coat and carried a knapsack. As the man came nearer, it became plain that he had been badly beaten. When the man raised his blue eyes from the ground, Inman realized that it was the preacher.

	Inman stepped into the road and said, "Hello."

	The preacher stopped and stared. "Good God," he said.

	"What happened to you?" said Inman.

	"When they found me and read your note, a number of men gave me a beating. They threw my clothes in the river and shaved my head. I was told to get out of town or they would hang me."

	"I can imagine," Inman said. "What happened to the girl?"

	"Oh, Laura Foster. She couldn't remember anything. When they discover she's going to have a child, people will talk about her for a time. In two or three years she'll marry an old man who wants a pretty woman."

	Inman started walking along the road and the preacher, whose name was Veasey, started walking with him.

	"Since you appear to be going west, I'll just walk with you, if you don't mind," he said.

	"But I do mind," Inman said, thinking it was better to go alone than with a fool for a friend. But Veasey continued to walk beside him, talking all the time. He seemed desperate to tell Inman the story of his life and share all the mistakes he had made. He was not a success as a preacher-that was clear even to Veasey.

	"I'm going to Texas to start a new life," Veasey said. "They say it's a land of freedom. I'll claim some land and keep cattle."

	"And how will you buy your first cow?" Inman asked.

	"With this." Veasey pulled a gun from under his coat. "I stole it a day or two ago."

	He sounded as pleased as a boy who had stolen a cake from a neighbor's kitchen.

	Inman and Veasey had not traveled far when they came to a tree that had been cut down. Beside it lay a long saw.

	"Look," Veasey said. "Someone would pay a lot of money for that."

	He went to pick it up and Inman said, "The woodcutters have just gone to get their dinners. They'll be back soon."

	"I don't know about that. I just found a saw by the road. I'll sell it to the first man we meet," Veasey replied.

	"For a preacher, you seem very happy to take other people's property," Inman said.

	They walked on and after a time saw a man standing below the road, looking at a large black bull that lay dead in the shallow water of a stream. The man saw them passing and shouted to them for help. Inman climbed down, and Veasey put the saw by the roadside and followed.

	They stood beside the man and looked at the bull, which had flies all around it. The man was in late middle age, with a big chest, dark eyes, and a little round mouth.

	"How do you aim to get it out?" Veasey asked.

	The man pointed to a rope that lay beside him. Inman looked at him and Veasey, then at the bull.

	"We could try to pull it," he said. "But it's a big animal. We'd do better to think of another way."

	The man ignored him and tied the rope onto the bull's neck and they all took hold of the rope and pulled. The body did not move. After some more useless pulling, without saying anything, Inman put down the rope and went back up to the road. He picked up the saw and returned to the bull, putting the saw to its neck.

	"Somebody take the other end of this thing," he said.

	Soon they had cut the animal up into sections, which they pulled out of the stream and left on the ground. The water was red with the animal's blood.

	"I wouldn't drink that water for a few days," Inman said.

	"Come and eat supper with us," the man said. "You can sleep in the barn."

	"Only if you'll take that saw," Inman replied.

	"I expect good money for it," Veasey said quickly.

	"Take it for nothing," said Inman.

	The man picked up the saw and the three men walked down the road, which followed the stream. They had not walked far when the man stopped and went to a big tree with a hole in its trunk. He put his arm into the hole and pulled out a bottle.

	"I've a number of these hidden around for the right moment," he said.

	They sat against the trunk of the tree and passed the bottle around. The man said his name was Junior, and he started telling stories about his youth and the number of women he had had. He said that all his troubles had begun when he had taken a wife, because three years after the wedding she had had a black baby. She had refused to name the father, and Junior had tried to separate from her, but the judge had not allowed it. She had later brought her two sisters to live with him and they had had children while unmarried.

	Having told his stories, Junior led the two men to his house, which was only a short distance away. It was large and in such terrible condition that it stood at an angle to the ground. They walked into the main room, and Junior immediately went to a cupboard and took out a bottle and three cups. The floor, like the rest of the house, was at an angle, and when Inman sat down, he had to stop the chair from sliding over to the wall.

	They drank for a time, and Inman became a little drunk. Soon, Veasey fell asleep where he sat. Then a young woman came wandering around the corner of the house and sat between Inman and Junior. She was fair-haired and round, and wore a cotton dress so thin and pale you could almost see her skin beneath it. Her hair was uncombed, and her dress was pulled up over her knees so that Inman could see the upper half of her legs.

	Junior said to Inman, "Get this cow to feed you."

	He rose and walked away. Inman followed the woman, who was called Lila, to the back of the house. There was a barn and a henhouse, and in the middle of the yard there was a big fire. Two more pale females appeared, obviously the sisters of Lila. They were followed by two dark-haired boys and a thin, pretty girl of eight or ten. They all gathered about the fire and Lila said, "Supper done?"

	Nobody said anything, and one of the sisters picked up a pot and took a deep drink. She passed it along, and when it got to Inman he drank from it, and it was like nothing he had drunk before. The pot went around a number of times.

	The sisters took some loaves from the fire and gave them to the children, who tore up the bread and put large pieces into their mouths before disappearing into the house. Then Lila came and stood next to Inman. She put a hand on his shoulder and said, "You're a big man."

	Inman could not think what to reply. Then one of the other sisters came over and said, "Come eat." Inman carried his knapsack to the porch, and Lila reached out and put it down. As she turned to walk into the house, Inman took the knapsack and pushed it deep into a space between some wood piled high on the porch. He followed the women into the main room and saw that Veasey was still asleep. A lamp was smoking on the table, throwing shadows across the walls and floor. Lila sat Inman at the table, and one of the sisters brought a plate of meat in. Inman could not say what creature it came from. All three girls gathered around the table to watch him eat. Then Lila came over to him and rubbed her stomach against his shoulder.

	"You're a fine-looking thing," she said.

	Inman's arms and legs felt strangely heavy and he was unable to think clearly. The young woman took his left hand and put it up under her skirt.

	"Get out," she said to the sisters, and they left.

	She climbed onto the table and sat so that her legs were over him. Then she pulled the top of her dress down and leaned forward. At that moment the door opened and Junior appeared, holding a lamp in one hand and a gun in the other.

	"What the hell's going on?" he said.

	Inman sat back in his chair and watched as Junior pointed the gun at him. "This would be a terrible place to die," he thought, but he felt unable to move. Junior looked over to where Veasey slept. "Go wake him up," he said to Lila, and she went to Veasey and bent over him. He woke with her chest in his face, and smiled. Until he saw the gun.

	"Now you get the other ones," Junior said to Lila. He walked over to her and hit her hard across the face. "Get up," he said to Inman.

	Pointing a gun at the two men, Junior made them walk out onto the porch. Inman moved slowly and with an effort. Up at the road he could see faint movements in the dark. As they came nearer, he saw a band of Home Guards and, behind them, another group of men who were chained to each other.

	"You're not the first one I've trapped here," Junior told Inman. "I get five dollars for every deserter I catch."

	They tied Inman and Veasey to the string of prisoners and pushed them all against the wall of the house. None of the tied men said a word, but moved to the wall like half-dead creatures. They leaned back and immediately fell into open-mouthed sleep. But Inman and Veasey stayed awake, from time to time pulling uselessly at their ropes.

	The Guards built up the fire in the yard until it stood as high as the walls of the house. After a time, one of them brought out a fiddle and started playing, while the other Guards drank from various pots. Then they danced around the fire and sometimes they could be seen pressing themselves against Lila or one of her sisters. When the men finally stopped dancing, Lila pushed herself against Inman. She looked him in the eye and said, "Bye bye." Then the Guards pointed their guns at the chained men and marched them off down the road toward the east.

	***

	For several days, Inman walked tied by the wrists at the end of a long rope with fifteen other men. Veasey was tied directly in front of Inman, and he walked with his head down, unable to believe his bad luck. Some of the chained men were old, others only boys, all of them accused of being deserters or of being on the side of the Federals. Inman understood that they were either being taken to prison or being returned to the fighting. As they walked, some men shouted that they were innocent, and others cried and begged to be freed.

	The prisoners walked for several days, hardly speaking to each other at all. For food they were given nothing, and for drink they simply bent over a stream and used their hands to hold the water. The old men grew especially tired, and when they could no longer walk, even when pushed by a gun, they were given a mixture of milk and corn. Some days the Guards made the prisoners walk all day and they slept at night. Some days they slept and rose at sunset and started walking and continued all night. It did not make much difference, because the woods were so thick that the sun never seemed to shine through them. Inman felt weak and faint. Hungry as well. The wound in his neck hurt, and he thought it might break open and start bleeding.

	Then one night they stopped and the prisoners were left tied, without food or water. The men piled up like dogs to sleep on the ground. They were woken up in the early hours of the morning by the Guards shining lamps in their faces, and were told to stand.

	The leader of the Guards said, "We had a talk and decided that you animals are just wasting our time."

	Then the Guards raised their guns. A boy, not much over twelve, fell to his knees and started crying. An old man, gray-headed, said, "You can't mean to kill us here."

	One of the Guards put down his gun and looked at the leader and said, "I didn't join the Home Guard to kill grandpas and little boys."

	The leader said to him, "Either you shoot them or you join them."

	Inman looked off into the dark woods. "This is where I will die," he thought.

	The firing started. Men and boys began falling all around. Veasey stepped forward and started shouting. He said, "It is not too late to stop this crime." Then he was shot a number of times. The bullet that hit Inman had already passed through Veasey's shoulder and as a result did not strike very hard. It hit Inman in the side of his head and came out behind his ear. He fell immediately but stayed partly conscious, unable to move or close his eyes. He watched as people died all around him and fell chained together.

	When the firing was done, the Guards seemed unclear what to do next. Finally, one of the men said, "We'd better get them under ground." They did the job badly, just digging out a shallow hole and throwing the men in and covering them with dirt. When they had finished, they climbed onto their horses and rode away.

	Inman had fallen with his face on his arm and he was able to breathe because the earth around him was so thin and loose. He lay half conscious for hours, with the smell of the dirt pulling him down. Dying there seemed easier than not. But before the dawn of day, wild pigs came from the woods, attracted by the smell, and they started digging up the earth. Inman found that he was staring into the face of one of these creatures.

	"Get away," Inman said.

	The animal moved back and looked at him, surprised. Inman sat up, his face covered in blood. He found the two holes in his head and felt them with his fingers. Then he started pulling at the rope with his hands, and Veasey appeared from the ground like a big fish, with his eyes open. Looking at him, Inman could not feel great sadness, but he did not feel glad either. By now, Inman guessed that he had seen thousands of men die. He feared his heart had been so touched by fire that he would never feel like an ordinary man again.

	He looked around until he found a sharp stone and sat until sunrise rubbing his wrists against it. When he finally freed himself, he rolled Veasey over, face down. That was all he could do for him.

	Inman set off walking west. All that morning he felt that his head would fall into a great number of pieces at his feet. By noon he came to a place where three roads met, and was unable to decide which one to take. He decided to sit by the side of the road and wait for a sign to show him which way he should go. After a time, he saw a yellow slave coming down the road driving a pair of bulls, one red and one white. They pulled a cart carrying a great number of green apples.

	"God!" said the man, who was thin and strong. "What happened to you?"

	He reached into the cart and threw a couple of apples to Inman, who ate them like a hungry dog. Then he looked up and said his thanks.

	"Get on this cart and come with me," the yellow man said.

	Inman climbed up and sat with his back against the side of the cart. When the yellow man came near the farm where he was owned, he made Inman lie down and covered him with apples. Then he took the cart into a barn and hid Inman under the roof.

	Inman rested there for some days, spending the time sleeping and being fed by the slaves on fried corn and pieces of meat.

	When his legs felt strong again, he prepared to set off on his journey once more. His clothes had been boiled clean and the slaves had given him an old black hat. There was a half-moon in the sky, and Inman stood at the door to say goodbye to the yellow man.

	"You listen," the man said. "There are Federals everywhere around here. Which direction are you going?"

	"West."

	The yellow man gave Inman good directions, advising him to go into the mountains in order to avoid the Feds. He gave him cornmeal and meat, and drew a detailed map for him.

	Inman put his hands in his pockets for money to give the man. He wanted to be generous but found his pockets empty and remembered that his money was in the knapsack hidden in Junior's woodpile.

	"I'd like to pay you but I've no money," Inman said.

	"I don't think I'd take it anyway," the man said.

	***

	Several nights later, Inman stood in front of Junior's house. He went to the back porch and found his knapsack in the pile of wood. He took his pistol out of the knapsack and the weight of it felt good in his hands.

	Light was coming from the door of the barn, and Inman went to the door, opened it slightly and looked inside. Junior stood rubbing salt on some meat. Inman opened the door fully and Junior raised his face and looked up at him. Inman stepped to Junior and struck him across the face with his pistol and then hit him until he lay flat on his back, blood pouring from his nose and the cuts on his head.

	Inman bent down and stared at Junior's face. The creature that lay on the ground was a horrible thing, but Inman feared that all men shared the same nature. He turned and went outside.

	All that night he walked north. The yellow man was right, and horsemen passed again and again in the dark, but Inman could hear them coming in time to step into the bushes. When morning came there was fog, so he was able to light a fire in the woods and boil some meat and cornmeal. He stayed in the woods all day, sleeping and worrying when he heard the sound of horses, his mood as black as night.



	Chapter six

	The Deserter's Story

	One warm afternoon at the start of fall, Ruby and Ada were working in the lower field, which Ruby had planned as the winter garden. Some weeks earlier they had prepared the garden, plowing the earth and then planting tiny black seeds. The crops were growing well and Ada and Ruby were pleased with their progress.

	They had been working among the plants for some time when they heard the sound of wheels and horses. A large cart came around the bend of the road and stopped by the fence. The cart was piled so full of things that the people all walked. Ada and Ruby went to the fence and saw a group of three women, half a dozen children, and two slaves. The women told them that they were from Tennessee and were on their way to South Carolina, where one of them had a sister. Their husbands were away fighting and they were escaping from the Federals in Tennessee. They asked if they could sleep in the barn.

	While Ada took them to the barn, Ruby prepared a meal, killing three chickens and cooking them with boiled potatoes and beans. When supper was ready, the group came and sat at the dining room table and ate hungrily.

	One of the women said, "That was good. For two weeks now we've had nothing to eat except dry corn bread."

	"Why are you on the road?" Ada asked.

	"The Federals came to our home and robbed even the slaves," the woman said. "They took every bit of food we had and all the jewelry we had hidden. Then they burned down our house in the rain and rode away. We had nothing, but we stayed for three days. Then we knew we had to leave."

	The travelers went off to bed, and the next morning Ruby cooked nearly all the eggs they had and made a cake for the group. After breakfast, Ada drew a map of the area and sent the women on the next part of their journey.

	Around noon, Ruby said she wanted to check the fruit trees, so Ada suggested that they have their lunch there. They made a picnic, and ate it on a blanket spread on the grass.

	It was a sunny afternoon. Ruby examined the trees and decided that the apples were doing quite well. Then suddenly, she looked at Ada and said, "Point north." She smiled at the length of time it took Ada to work out which direction north was in. Such questions were a recent habit Ruby had developed. Ruby seemed to enjoy showing Ada how little she knew about the natural world. As they walked by the stream one day Ruby had asked, "Where does that water come from and where does it go?" Another day she had said, "Name me four plants on that hillside that you could eat." Ada did not yet have those answers, but she felt that she was learning. Now, as they sat on the blanket, she told Ruby that she envied her knowledge of how the world worked. "How did you learn these things?" Ada asked.

	Ruby said she had learned the little she knew in the usual way. A lot of it was grandmother knowledge, learned from wandering around, talking to any old woman who would talk back, watching them work, and asking questions. Partly, though, she said that it was mostly a matter of careful observation.

	They sat quietly for a time, and then in the warm, still air of the afternoon Ruby lay down and slept on the blanket. Ada was tired, too, but she fought off sleep like a child at bedtime. She rose and walked beyond the fruit trees to the edge of the wood, where the tall fall flowers grew, yellow and dark blue and gray. Birds flew among the flower heads. Ada stood still, watching the busy movements of insects. On a day like this, despite the war and the hard work the farm needed, she could not see how she could improve her world. It seemed so fine she doubted it could be done.

	That evening, after Ruby had gone to bed, Ada remained on the porch looking out past the fields to the mountains and up to the darkening sky. Everything was becoming still. She remembered that she and Monroe had sat together on a night like this just after moving to the cove. Monroe had commented that the mountains were signs of another world, a world beyond our own that we deeply longed for. And Ada had then agreed.

	But now, as she looked out at the view, she thought that this was no sign but was all the life there is. It was an opposite position to Monroe's, but still created its own powerful longing.

	Ada left the porch and walked past the barn into the field. The sun was setting fast and the mountains were gray in the dying light. There was a great feeling of loneliness that Ada had felt in the place from the beginning. Monroe had had an explanation. He said that in their hearts people feel that long ago God was everywhere all the time; the sense of loneliness is what fills the emptiness when He leaves us.

	It was cold. Ada went to put away Waldo, and as the cow rose to its feet, she felt its heat rise from the flattened grass around her legs. She bent and put her hands under the grass and into the dirt that still felt as warm as a living thing from the heat of the day and the body of the cow.

	***

	They had begun walking to the town in the rain, Ada wearing a long coat and Ruby an enormous sweater that she had made. They carried umbrellas, but an hour later the rain had stopped and the weather had turned sunny. It was largely a pleasure trip that the two young women were taking, although they did need to buy a few small things. Mainly, though, after weeks of hard, backbreaking work, Ada longed to go on a trip to town and the morning's bad weather had not stopped her.

	"I'm going to town if I have to get there on my hands and knees," she had said to Ruby.

	In town, Ada and Ruby first walked about the streets, looking at the stores, the carriages, and the women with their shopping baskets. The town was small and ordinary, with eleven stores, a church, and a courthouse-a white building set back from the road. There were deep tracks in the streets from the wheels of carts and carriages.

	Ada and Ruby did their shopping, buying bullets, pencils, and a drawing book. For lunch they bought beer, hard cheese, and fresh bread and took it down by the river and sat on rocks to eat. Later, as they walked down the main street on the way out of town, they saw a group of people standing by the courthouse, looking up at a window. Joining the group, they found that a prisoner was talking to the people below.

	He talked angrily and fast, claiming that he had fought hard in the war and had killed many Federals. He had been shot in the shoulder at Williamsburg. But he had recently stopped believing in the war, and since he had joined the army out of choice, his only crime was his decision to leave and walk home. Now here he was in prison. And they might hang him, though he had fought like a hero.

	The prisoner then told the crowd that the Home Guard had taken him some days previously from his father's farm in the mountains. He had been hiding there with other outliers. It had been early evening when the outliers and the prisoners father had heard the sound of horses approaching. His father took his gun and went out to the road, while the outliers ran to hide in the barn.

	A small group of horsemen came slowly around the bend. There were two great dark men who looked like each other, and a thin white-headed boy wearing farm clothes. The fourth man looked like a traveling preacher in his long black coat and white shirt.

	"Stop right there," the prisoner's father said to the horsemen when they were some distance away. They did not stop immediately but came closer.

	The old man said to the man in the black coat, "I know who you are. You're Teague. Get over here."

	Teague looked at the old man with dead eyes, and did not move. The other men got off their horses. Suddenly the white-headed boy fell down in the dirt and screamed. The old man turned to look at him, and as he did, one of the black men hit the old man hard on the head and then knocked his gun from his hand. The old man fell on his back, and the black man beat him with his gun until he lay still. Then he took his sword and stuck it into the old man's stomach.

	The boy got up and stood over the man and looked at him. "He's ready to meet his Maker," he said.

	Laughing, the four approached the house, walking around it three times before bursting through the front and back doors at the same moment. Within minutes they were out again, carrying a cooked chicken and two sacks of potatoes, which they put in their baskets.

	Then, without a word, they went toward the barn. As they approached it, the door flew open and the three outliers ran out, holding farm tools as weapons. Teague put his gun to his shoulder and shot the first two men, who fell to the ground. The last man, the prisoner, stopped, dropped his weapon, and raised his hands.

	Teague looked at him a minute, then said to the white-headed boy, "Birch, get me something to tie his hands and we'll lead him back to town on the end of a line."

	The boy went to the horses and came back with some rope, but when they tried to tie the prisoner, he fought and screamed. Finally they managed to throw him to the ground and put his wrists and ankles together.

	"He's a madman," Birch said.

	They brought a chair from the house and tied the man into it.

	"I'm thinking we should hang him from the top of the barn," Teague said.

	"It'd look better if we brought someone into town now and then," Birch said.

	The men talked for a while and decided that Birch was right. They tied the chair to the cart that stood in the yard, then fixed the cart to a horse, and set off for town.

	By the time the prisoner had stopped talking, the sun had set, and Ruby and Ada turned from the courthouse and started walking home. For a time they were wordless with shock, but later they discussed the prisoner's story. Ada was not sure it was completely true, but Ruby said that it fitted what she knew of men's natures.



	Chapter seven

	Two Women

	Inman followed the yellow man's map through what the people of the area called hill country. Nights were cool and the leaves were beginning to change color. There was too much open ground to feel good about walking by day, and by night the roads were so full of dark riders that Inman spent as much time hiding in bushes as walking. As soon as he could, Inman left the dangerous roads of the valleys and took a narrow path that aimed north toward the mountains. He climbed for part of one day and all of the next, and there was still a wall of mountain rising in front of him.

	Late in the afternoon cold rain began falling, and it was past the middle of the night when he came to a big tree with a large hole in it. He climbed inside, glad to find a dry place, and fell asleep.

	He woke soon after dawn, feeling tired, ill and stiff, with the wounds in his head and neck burning hot. All the food he had left in his knapsack was a cup of cornmeal, and it was too wet to make a fire. He sat for a time on a rock, and then got up and walked all morning through the dark woods. The path went up and up, and Inman had no idea where it was leading.

	Near midday he came around a bend, and saw a tiny person leaning over a bush. When he came closer, he saw that it was a little old woman, who was putting food in a bird trap.

	Inman stopped and said, "Hello, ma'am."

	The little woman looked up at him. She was quite old, that was clear, but her cheeks were as pink and fine as a girl's. She wore a man's hat, and her thin white hair hung to her shoulders. Her full skirt and blouse were made of animal skins and she had a gun in her belt.

	"I'm wondering if this road goes anywhere," Inman said.

	"It goes west, I believe," the woman said.

	"Thank you," said Inman.

	The woman looked at Inman. "Those look like bullet holes in your head," she said. "You look faint. White."

	"I'm fine," Inman said.

	"You look like you could eat something. I'd be glad if you'd take shelter and dinner at my camp."

	"Then I'd be a fool to say no," Inman said.

	Inman followed the woman as she climbed to a bend, and from there they left the forest and walked on great rocks along the side of a mountain. A river gorge stretched blue and purple far below them. Then they entered a narrow path cut into the mountain and soon came to a dark cove with a little stream running through it. A small caravan stood in a space surrounded by trees. Birds walked on the roof of the caravan, whose sides were painted with colorful scenes, and plants had twisted themselves around the wheels.

	The woman stopped and shouted, "Hey!" and about two dozen goats came out the woods, their yellow eyes bright and smart, the bells around their necks ringing. The woman disappeared around the side of the caravan and the goats followed her. Inman found her building up her cooking fire, and when it was burning well, Inman went to it and put out his hands to warm. A little brown and white goat came to the woman and she stroked it and scratched its neck until it lay down. Inman thought it was a peaceful scene. Then, with one smooth movement, she took a knife from her pocket and cut deep into the animal's neck. The little goat's body shook as she continued to stroke it until it lay still.

	Inman watched the old woman as she cut the goat's body into pieces, some of which she put over the fire to cook. Other pieces she put in a pot with water and vegetables.

	"By dinnertime we'll have a good meal," she said.

	Later, the rain started again and Inman went into the caravan and sat by the tiny stove. There was a table piled high with papers and books and on the walls there were drawings of plants, some colored, with a great deal of tiny writing around the edges of the paper.

	The woman fried some bread and gave it to Inman, together with some meat. "Thank you," said Inman, eating it fast. While he ate, she began making cheese from goat's milk. When she was finished, she handed him some of the milk. Then she sat in a chair by the stove and took her shoes off.

	"Did you run off from the war?" she asked.

	Inman showed her the angry cut at his neck. "Wounded and sent home," he said.

	"Oh, I'm sure," she answered.

	"How long have you been camped here?" asked Inman.

	She thought for a minute. "Twenty-six years," she said.

	"Never married?"

	"Yes, I was, though I guess he's dead now. I was a stupid little girl and he was old. He'd already had three wives who'd all died. There was a boy I liked but this man had a nice farm and my family sold me to him. He treated me like a slave. I got up one night and rode away before dawn on his best horse. I've been alone since then. There's a little town about a half day's walk away. I sell cheese there and medicines that I make from plants."

	She looked at him carefully "Those new wounds in your head are not so bad. When they heal up, the hair will cover them and no one will know they're there."

	Then she said, "Listen, I don't care that you've run off from the war. It's dangerous for you, that's all."

	He looked her in the eyes and saw that they were full of kindness. For a long time he had not met anyone who he trusted the way he did this goatwoman, so he told her what was in his heart. The shame he felt about shooting the Federals, men like him, who ran at guns and died. Then he told her how that morning he had found a bush of dusty blue berries. He had picked them and eaten them for breakfast and watched as some birds had flown across the sky toward the south. At least nature doesn't change, he thought. Inman had seen only change for four years, and guessed that people fought wars because they were bored. But sooner or later you get tired of watching people kill each other. So that morning he had looked at the berries and felt happy, knowing that nature continued unchanging.

	The woman thought about what he had said, then got up and took a bottle containing a thick liquid from her cupboard. She went to Inman and rubbed the liquid on the wounds on his head and neck. When she had finished, she handed the bottle to him.

	"Take it with you," she said. "Rub it on thick until it's gone. And take these, too. Take one a day, starting now." She took some large pills from a purse and put them in his hand.

	Sometime in the evening they ate the roast meat and the food in the pot. They sat side by side and listened to the faint rain come down in the woods. To Inman's surprise, he started talking about Ada, describing her character and her beauty, and his realization that he loved her and wanted to marry her. Then they sat for a time without talking while the rain came down harder.

	"It must get cold in winter up here," Inman said.

	"Cold enough. I keep the fire hot and the blankets deep, and I'm careful not to let my ink and paints freeze."

	"What is it that you do in those books?" Inman asked.

	"I draw pictures and write."

	"About what?"

	"Everything. The goats. Plants. Weather. I keep a record."

	"And you've spent your life this way?"

	"Until now, I have. I'm not dead yet."

	"Don't you get lonely?"

	"Sometimes, yes. But there's plenty of work."

	The rain began falling harder and they stopped their talking, and Inman went on his hands and knees under the caravan, rolled up in his blankets, and slept. He rose at dawn and packed his things.

	"I need to go," he told the old woman. "But I'd like to pay you for the food and medicine."

	"You could try," the woman said. "But I wouldn't take it." "Well, thank you," Inman said.

	"Listen," the woman said. "If I had a boy, I'd tell him the same as I'm telling you. Watch out for yourself."

	"I will," Inman said.

	He turned to walk out of the caravan, but she stopped him. She said, "Here, take this with you," and she handed him a square of paper on which was drawn in great detail a branch of blue-purple berries.

	***

	Inman wandered the mountains for days, lost in the fog and rain that never seemed to stop. He used the goatwoman's medicine until it was gone, and the wounds in his neck and head had healed. His knapsack became empty of food. At first he hunted, but without success. He tried fishing, but there were few fish in the mountain streams. He felt like a wild animal, almost mad with hunger. God, if I could grow wings and fly, he thought, I would be gone from this place. I'd fly far away and watch the world from a high rock.

	Then, just as he thought that he could go no further, he came to a lonely little one-room cabin set above the road. The windows were pieces of paper. There was a pig making noises by the fence. Inman stepped up to the gate and shouted, and a young woman, a girl really, came to the door and looked out. She was a tight skinned, pretty little thing, and wore a light cotton dress that did not suit the weather. She looked at him for a minute and then said, "Well, come in."

	"I'll pay for what I eat," said Inman.

	"I have very little, but I won't take money. There's cornbread and beans, that's all."

	She turned and walked into the house. Inman followed. The room was dark, lit only by the fire, and though there was very little furniture the room was clean. A small baby lay warmly wrapped on the bed.

	The woman pulled one of the chairs to the fire and pointed to Inman to sit, and in a minute a faint steam had begun to rise from his wet clothes. She served him a plate piled high with beans and bread. Inman started eating loudly and fast, while the woman sat watching him with some disgust.

	"I'm sorry. I've not taken actual food in days," he said.

	"There's no need to be sorry," she replied.

	Inman looked at her closely for the first time. "How old are you?" he asked.

	"Eighteen."

	"Name's Inman. Yours?"

	"Sara."

	"Why are you here all alone?"

	"My man, John, went off to the fighting. He died some months ago. They killed him up in Virginia. He never saw his baby, and it's just the two of us now."

	Inman sat silent for a minute. "Do you have any help here?" he said.

	"None."

	"How do you manage?"

	"I use a little plow to grow corn and vegetables. And there are a few chickens for the eggs. That pig is our food for the winter. I have to kill it soon, but I've never killed a pig before."

	Listening to her, Inman thought that she would be old in five years' time. He saw all the world hanging over the girl like a trap, ready to drop and destroy her.

	"I could help," he said.

	"I couldn't ask it. I'd have to do it as an exchange. I could clean and sew up the holes in those clothes of yours. And you could put on clothes my man left. He was about as tall as you are."

	She left the room and returned with a pile of folded clothes, a clean pair of good boots, and a bowl of water and soap. He stepped outside, took off his clothes, and washed himself. Then he dressed. The dead man's clothes fitted quite well, and the boots were perfect. When he went back indoors, he felt like the ghost of her husband.

	They sat quietly by the fire for a time. Then she said, "You'll have to sleep in the henhouse."

	He walked out and took his knapsack and went to the henhouse. It was almost freezing and he rolled himself in his wet blankets. He had only just fallen asleep when he was woken up by the girl.

	"Come inside, please," she said. And she turned and walked away. When he went back inside she was in bed, her hair spread thick across her shoulders.

	"If I asked you to lay in bed with me but not do anything else, could you do it?" she said.

	Inman looked at her and wondered what she saw looking back. A stranger filling the clothes of her husband. "Yes," he said. He went over, pulled off his boots, and climbed under the bed covers. They both kept absolutely still. Then she started to cry, her chest shaking. After a time, she sat up and started talking about her husband. She just wanted Inman to listen to her story, and every time he tried to speak she silenced him. When she had finished talking, she reached out and touched the cut in Inman's neck. She rested her hand there for a moment before taking it away, then rolled over with her back to him and soon fell asleep. But tired as he was, Inman could not rest. A woman had not touched him like that for so long that he hardly saw himself as human. He saw his life now as a dark mistake and did not even think it possible to pull Sara to him and hold her close until daylight.

	Inman was woken by Sara shaking his shoulder and saying urgently, "Get up and get out."

	It was gray dawn and the cabin was freezing cold, and there was the faint sound of horses coming up the road.

	"If it's the Home Guard, it would be better for both of us if you were not here."

	Inman pulled on his boots and rushed out the back door to the line of trees beyond the stream. There, he hid behind a bush that gave him a view of the front of the house. He could see Sara run across to where the pig slept. She was driving the animal toward the woods when there was a call from down the road.

	"Stop right there."

	Blue jackets-Federals. Inman saw three men on horses, all carrying guns. One of the men went to her and told her to sit on the ground. The pig sat on the ground beside her. The other two men went into the house and there was the sound of things breaking. When the men reappeared, one of them carried the baby. It was crying, and Sara begged them to give her the child but they would not. Then Inman could hear that they were asking her about money, where she had it hidden. Sara told the truth, that she only had what they could see. They asked again and again, and then led her to the porch and tied her to it. One of the men took the baby's clothes off and lay the child on the frozen ground.

	Inman could hear one of the men say, "We have all day," and then he could hear Sara scream.

	The men searched the yard, hoping to find money or jewelry buried in the earth, but they found nothing. Then the leader walked to Sara and pointed his gun at her. "You really don't have anything, do you?"

	One of the men gave the baby to her. Then they gathered up the chickens and hung them on their horses. When Sara saw the leader taking the pig away, she shouted, "That pig's all I have. Take it and you'll kill us both." But the men climbed on their horses and went down the road, leading the pig behind them on the end of a rope.

	When they had disappeared, Inman ran to Sara. He said, "Warm up your baby and then build a fire as high as your head and put a big pot on to boil." And he ran down the road.

	He followed the Federals, wondering what he intended to do. They did not go far before they built a fire and tied the pig to a tree. Then they killed two chickens and put them to roast on the fire.

	Inman circled the area, and in the rocks near the camp he found a shallow cave. Returning to the edge of the men's camp, he climbed a big tree. In just a minute one of the men walked under the tree and stopped.

	Inman said, "Hey!"

	The man looked up and Inman shot him. The bullet entered at the shoulder and left through the stomach. The man fell to the ground immediately.

	"Did you hit it?" one of the men in the camp called out.

	Inman climbed down from the tree, circled the camp, hid behind a bush, and waited. Soon, the men went to find their friend. Inman followed them. Discovering that he was dead, they stood for a time and talked about what they ought to do. They decided to look for the killer. Inman followed them, moving nearer and nearer. When he shot them, he was so near he was almost touching them. They fell in a pile.

	"If you'd stayed home, this wouldn't have happened," Inman said.

	He dragged all three bodies to the cave and sat them up together. Then he led the horses far beyond the cave and shot them in the heads. It was not a happy thing to do, but he knew that if he left them free, people would come looking for their owners. Finally, he returned to the camp, picked up the cooked chickens, and led the pig back down the road.

	When he returned to the cabin, Sara had built a good fire in the yard and there was a big pot of water boiling over it. They had an early lunch of the cooked chickens and then started work. Within two hours the pig had been killed, skinned, and cut into sections. They worked until dark, using all the parts of the pig and salting the meat.

	Then they washed and went inside and Sara cooked.

	After dinner, Sara said, "You'd look better if you shaved."

	So Inman shaved in front of a metal mirror. The eyes that looked back at him had a look that he did not remember, a look that was more than just food hunger. It was a killer face, with eyes that looked at you sideways. But Inman tried to believe that this face was not him in any true way, and that it could in time be changed for a better one.

	When he came back in, Sara smiled at him and said, "You look part human now."

	They sat and looked at the fire and Sara held the baby in her lap. It would not sleep, so she sang it a song, a song which expressed such loneliness that it hurt Inman to hear it. The sound was of an old tired woman, and Sara was so young to sound that way. For the rest of the evening they hardly talked, but sat side by side in front of the fire, rested and happy, and later they again lay in bed together.

	The next morning, Inman ate the brains of the pig before setting off on his journey again.



	Chapter eight

	Stobrod Returns

	As the fall progressed, Ruby made plans for the coming winter. One afternoon, she threw two big sacks of apples over Ralph, the horse, and set off for town. She returned carrying six sacks of vegetables that she had exchanged for the apples. When she saw Ada, she handed her a letter, dirty as an old work glove. Ada recognized the handwriting but put the letter away, not wanting to read it while Ruby watched.

	That evening, when Ruby had gone to bed, Ada sat on the porch and took the letter from her pocket. By now she had read it several times. She found parts of it hard to understand. Inman seemed to feel that there were strong feelings between them, although Ada could not say exactly how she felt. She had not seen Inman in almost four years, and it had been more than four months since she had last heard from him. The letter she held now was without date, and she did not know if it had been written a week ago or was three months old. He mentioned that he was wounded and talked about coming home, but did he mean now or at the end of the war?

	She tried to read the letter in the dark. The only part she could see clearly was this short paragraph:

	If you still possess the photograph of me that I sent four years ago, I ask you, please throw it away. I no longer look the same in any way.

	Ada of course went immediately to her bedroom and opened drawers until she found the photograph. She had put it away because she had never thought it looked much like Inman. His expression in the picture was very serious, and didn't look like her memory of him on the last day before he left for the war.

	He had come to the house to say goodbye. He was, at the time, living in a room in the town but planning to leave in two days, three at the most. They had walked together down to the stream beyond the fields. Inman, as they talked, was sometimes serious and sometimes cheerful. Ada found herself wondering, "What will I feel if he is killed?" But she could not, of course, say the thought aloud. She did not have to, though, because Inman at that moment said, "If I am shot to death, in five years you'll hardly remember my name."

	"You know it's not that way," she said.

	In her heart, though, she wondered, "Is anything remembered forever?" Inman looked away and seemed to be made shy by what he had said.

	"Look there," he said. He looked up at Cold Mountain, which was wintery and gray. He started telling her a story about the mountain that he had heard from an old Indian woman. It was about a village called Kanuga that many years ago stood on the Pigeon River.

	One day, a stranger had come into Kanuga and the people had fed him. As he ate, they asked him if he came from far away.

	"No," he said, "I live in a town near here." He pointed in the direction of Cold Mountain.

	"There is no village up there," the people said.

	"Oh yes," the stranger said. "The Shining Rocks are the entrance to our country."

	"But I've been to the Shining Rocks many times, and have seen no such country," said one man, and others agreed, because they knew the place he spoke of well.

	"You must fast," the stranger said. "If not, we see you but you do not see us. Our land is not like yours. Here there is constant fighting and sickness. And soon an enemy will come and take your country away from you. But there we have peace. And although we die, as all men do, and must hunt for food, our minds are not filled with fear. I have come to invite you to live with us. But before you come, you must fast for seven days. Then climb to the Shining Rocks and they will open like a door, and you may enter our country and live with us."

	Having said this, the stranger went away. After much discussion, the people decided to accept the invitation. They did not eat for seven days, all except for one man who, each night, secretly went to his house and ate meat.

	On the morning of the seventh day, the people climbed toward the Shining Rocks, arriving at sunset. When the people stood in front of the white rocks, a cave opened like a door, and they saw that it was light inside, not dark. In the distance, inside the mountain, they could see a river and fields of corn. Then there was thunder and the sky turned black. The people were frightened, but only the man who had eaten the meat became really afraid. He gave a cry of terror and immediately the thunder stopped and the cave door closed, so that there was only the white rock, shining in the last light of the sun.

	The people went sadly back to Kanuga. Soon, the stranger's words came true and their land was taken from them.

	When Inman was finished, Ada said, "That was a strange story. You don't believe it, do you?"

	She immediately regretted saying this, because the story obviously meant something to Inman. He looked at her and then at the stream. Then he said, "That old woman looked older than God and she cried tears when she told the story."

	"But it can't be true," Ada said.

	"I believe it's true that she had the chance to live in a better world and somehow she lost it."

	Neither of them knew what to say next, so Inman said, "I need to go." He took Ada's hand and put his lips to the back of it, before letting it go. He had walked some distance before he turned around and saw Ada turning to walk to the house. Too soon. She had not even waited for him to pass the first bend in the road. Realizing what she had done, Ada stopped and looked at Inman.

	Inman turned to face her and said, "You don't have to stand watching me."

	"I know I don't," Ada said.

	"You don't want to, I can see that."

	"It wouldn't help," she said.

	"It might make some men feel better." He took off his hat and raised it to her. "I'll see you when I see you," he said.

	They walked away, this time without looking back.

	That night, though, Ada did not feel happy about Inman going to war. It worried her that she had not cried or said what thousands of women said as men left, that they would wait for the man's return forever. She suspected that, out of habit, she had been distant and cold, and she feared that one day she would find that she could show no other feelings to the world.

	She slept badly, her thoughts returning to Inman again and again. But when she woke the next morning, she felt clear-headed and bright, and decided to correct her mistake. The day was cloudless and warm. Ada told Monroe that she wanted to go into town and they drove off in the carriage. When they got there, Monroe gave her twenty dollars and told her to buy something nice. They separated and Ada bought a book and a scarf. Then, knowing it was not how a young lady should behave, she walked to the place where Inman was staying, and climbed the steps to his door.

	Inman's face showed surprise when he saw Ada. He came out of his room and crossed his arms. There was a long silence.

	She said, "I wanted to tell you that I thought things ended badly yesterday. Not at all as I wished them to be."

	Inman's mouth tightened. He said, "I don't believe I understand you. I didn't expect anything different."

	At Inman's reply, Ada thought about walking away and putting him forever behind her. But she said, "We might never speak again, and I know I disappointed you yesterday. I didn't follow my heart. I'm sorry for that."

	"It's too late," Inman said, still standing with his arms crossed, and Ada reached out and pulled until she unlocked his arms. Then she took his wrist and held it.

	Neither of them, for a moment, could look the other in the face. Then Inman pulled his hand away and threw his hat in the air and caught it. They both smiled, and Inman put one hand to Ada's waist and pulled her to him for the kiss they had not given each other the day before.

	They walked together down the steps, feeling that a promise had been made.

	"I hope I see you soon," Inman said.

	"We both do, then," Ada replied.

	***

	One afternoon, as Ruby was working in the yard, she saw a man in dark clothes and a big gray hat coming toward her, with a smile on his face.

	"So you're not dead?" Ruby said.

	"Not yet," said Stobrod.

	Ruby looked at him. He had changed. He seemed such an old, small man, with his hair half gone from his head.

	"How old are you now?" she said.

	He thought for a minute. "Maybe forty-five," he said.

	"You've run off from the fighting, no doubt."

	"I fought like a hero."

	"You sit on the porch steps and I'll bring you some food," Ruby said.

	She went inside and found Ada sitting by the window in the kitchen.

	"My daddy's out on the porch," Ruby said.

	"Pardon?"

	"Stobrod. He's come home from the war. But I don't care. A plate of food and then we'll send him away."

	Ruby put some food on a plate and carried it out to the table underneath the apple tree.

	"He could eat in here," Ada said.

	"No," Ruby said.

	They watched from the window as Stobrod ate, then Ruby went out to collect his plate.

	"Have you somewhere to go?" she asked.

	Stobrod told her that he was living with a group of outliers in a deep cave in the mountains. They wished only to hunt and eat, get drunk, and make music.

	"Well, I guess that suits you," said Ruby.

	She waved at him to leave and he walked off, in the direction of Cold Mountain.

	The two women did not think that they would see Stobrod again, but the next evening, as they were having supper at the table under the apple tree, Stobrod and another man came out from the woods.

	"You just say, and I'll send them on their way," Ruby said.

	Ada said, "We have plenty."

	The two men sat down and Ruby handed them food, which they ate fast. At first, Ruby refused to speak, and Stobrod talked about the war with Ada, saying how he hoped it would end so he could come down from the mountain.

	"It's no joke living on the mountain," Stobrod said. "That Teague and his men are killers."

	"Who's your friend?" Ruby asked Stobrod.

	"That's Pangle. He's not very smart."

	Pangle was a soft, fat thing, with a big round head and hair that was almost white. He had no talent in the world, except a recently discovered ability to play the fiddle, but he was gentle and kind and looked on everything that happened with soft, wide eyes.

	When supper was done, Stobrod lifted his sack off the ground and took a fiddle from it. He told the women that something about the war had completely changed how he felt about music.

	"Some say I fiddle now like a man wild with fever," he said. He told them how, in January 1862, a man had come into the army camp, asking for a fiddler. The man's fifteen-year-old daughter was dying, and the girl had asked for fiddle music to be played to help the pain.

	Stobrod had picked up his instrument and followed the man to his house. He had played some dance tunes to the girl as she lay dying, and when he had finished she had asked him to play something of his own. Stobrod was surprised by this request and sat thinking for a minute. Then he started playing, and was surprised by the sad, beautiful sound that came from the fiddle.

	When he was done, the girl looked at him and said, "That was fine." And then she turned her face away and died.

	Since then, music had become more and more important to Stobrod. He lost all interest in the war, and instead spent his time learning new tunes from other fiddlers, and making up his own. By now he knew nine hundred fiddle tunes, many of which he had written himself.

	"Well, play then," Ruby said.

	Stobrod sat and thought for a minute, then started to play. The tune was slow and sad, quite difficult to play, and very beautiful. Ruby and Ada listened in surprise. To Ada, Stobrod's playing seemed to show that even a man like Ruby's father could learn and change for the better.

	When Stobrod had finished, he played other wild and beautiful tunes of his own, and Pangle took his fiddle and played with him. As the last tune came to an end, Stobrod smiled a deep, long smile of silent joy.

	"He's done you some good there," Pangle said to Ada. And then he seemed shocked that he had spoken directly to her, and put his head down, and then looked off into the woods.

	Stobrod said, "I want to ask you something."

	"What?" Ruby said.

	"The problem is, I need help. I'm frightened."

	He explained that the group of outliers he was living with had started robbing farms. He was afraid that they would attract the attention of the law, and that the Home Guard would come for them. Stobrod had decided to leave the group, taking Pangle, who was one of the group, with him. He needed a promise of food, a place like the barn to stay in in bad weather, and maybe now and then a little money.

	"Eat roots," said Ruby. "Drink muddy water."

	"Have you not got more feeling than that for your daddy?" Stobrod said.

	"When I was not yet eight, you left me to look after myself for three months. And there's this. If the stories about Teague are even half true, we have plenty to worry about if we shelter you. This is not my place. But if it was, I'd say no."

	And with that, Ruby rose and walked off into the darkness. Sometime later, having sent Stobrod off with half-promises of food, Ada was sitting out on the porch, looking at the moon, which was full and high and throwing such light that every tree had a blue shadow. She thought about a love song that Stobrod had sung that night. Its last line was: "Come back to me is my request." Stobrod had sung the line with feeling, and Ada had to admit that, at least now and then, it was important to say what your heart felt, straight and simple. She had never been able to do it in her whole life, but she thought that she would try now.

	She went into the house and came back with pen, ink, and paper, then stared at the paper for some minutes. None of the words that came into her head seemed real. Finally she wrote, "Come back to me is my request." She signed her name and folded the paper and addressed it to the hospital in the capital. Then she wrapped herself tight in the blankets, and soon she was asleep.



	Chapter nine

	Death in the Mountains

	If the part of the mountain they climbed had a name, Stobrod did not know it. He and the two men with him walked looking down at the ground, their hats pulled over their noses, and their hands pulled up into their coat sleeves to protect them from the cold. The Pangle boy was close behind Stobrod, and the third figure followed six steps back. The night before, they had found a couple of dead rabbits and had lit a fire and cooked and eaten them. Now they regretted it, because they all had bad stomach pains, and from time to time one of them had to go off behind a bush.

	It was almost dawn and there was no color to anything, only shades of brown and gray. They came to a piece of flat ground where three paths met. The three men stood together, breathless from the climb.

	"It's cold," the third man said. He had been one of the group at the outliers' cave and had never offered a name. He was from Georgia, a boy of no more than seventeen years, black-haired, brown-skinned. He had fought in the war for a year, then left to walk back home. It had taken him three months to reach Cold Mountain, and he had been found by one of the outliers, wandering aimlessly in the forest. The men had agreed that he should leave with Stobrod and Pangle, who were setting off alone to find a cave to live in somewhere near the Shining Rocks.

	First, however, they had gone to a hiding place where Ruby had hidden some food. Stobrod had told the boy about Ada and Ruby, and how Ada had persuaded Ruby to feed them, although the women could not give quite enough for the men to live on. Ruby would not allow the men to visit the farm, as she thought it was too dangerous, so she left the food in a place that she had discovered as a child. They had gone there before they started on their journey and found cornmeal, dried apple, and some meat and beans.

	"Do you know which path we want?" the Georgia boy said now to Stobrod. But Stobrod was not at all sure where they were nor which way they were going.

	Pangle watched him for some minutes, and then, apologizing, said he knew exactly where he was, and that the right-hand path went right across the mountain and was the path they wanted.

	"We'll cook a meal and go on then," Stobrod said.

	The men built a small fire and boiled up some cornmeal. They sat as near to the flames as they could, and passed a bottle, waiting for the fire and drink to warm them up. The Georgia boy sat bent over, with a hand on his stomach.

	"If I'd known I'd feel this bad, I wouldn't have eaten one mouthful of that rabbit," he said.

	He stood and walked slowly into the trees. Stobrod's head fell sleepily to his chest, and when he looked up again he was looking at three men on horses, their guns pointing at him. Stobrod started to get up.

	"Sit still," Teague said. "I'm not even going to ask you if you have papers. We're looking for a group of outliers living in a cave. They've been robbing farms. If a man knew where that cave was, it might help him."

	"I don't exactly know," Stobrod said. "I'd say if I did." His voice was quick and bright, but inside he was thinking that in a month he'd be back in Virginia using a gun.

	Pangle looked in surprise at Stobrod. "That's not true," he said. "You know exactly where it is." And he gave a detailed description of how to find the cave.

	"Thanks," Teague said and smiled at his men, and they all climbed off their horses. "We'll join you at your fire and take breakfast with you."

	They built up the fire and sat around it like friends. The Guards had meat with them, and they cooked and ate it, offering some to the outliers. Teague took a bottle from his coat and handed it around. When they had finished eating, Teague looked at the fiddles, which were lying on the ground, and said, "Can you play those things?"

	"A bit," Stobrod said.

	"Play me something, then," Teague said.

	Stobrod did not much want to. He was tired and he guessed that his audience did not take pleasure from music. But he picked up his fiddle and started to play, and Pangle joined him. Teague and his men had never before heard such strange, wild music, nor heard anyone play with such feeling and skill.

	When they had finished, Birch said to Teague, "Good God, these are strange men."

	Teague looked off into the distance. He stood and straightened his coat, then he took his gun and pointed it at the two men.

	"Stand up against that big tree," he said.

	The two men went and stood against it, holding their fiddles in front of them. Pangle put his free arm around Stobrod's shoulders. The Guards raised their guns and Pangle gave them a friendly smile.

	"I can't shoot a man who's smiling at me," one of the men said.

	"Stop smiling," Teague said to Pangle.

	Pangle tried to stop smiling, but without success.

	"Take your hat off and hold it over your face," Teague said.

	Pangle raised his hat and put it over his face, and when he did the Guards fired. Pieces of wood flew from the tree trunk, where the bullets struck after passing through the meat of the two men.

	"And when they had finished, they didn't cover them or even go and stand over them to say words. They just got on their horses and rode off. I don't know what kind of place this is, where people kill each other that way."

	The Georgia boy sounded like someone who had had a terrible shock. "I saw it all," he said, "saw it all."

	"Then why were you not killed or taken, if you were close enough to witness?" Ada said.

	The boy thought about it. "I heard what I didn't see, anyway," he answered. "I'd stepped into the woods. I needed to be private."

	"We get your meaning," Ruby said.

	"I came here as fast as I could. I remembered where the fiddler said you lived."

	"How long ago?" Ruby asked.

	The boy thought for a moment. "Six or seven hours."

	"You can guide us back there," Ada said.

	But the boy did not wish to go back up the mountain, and would, he claimed, rather be shot where he stood than visit it again.

	Ruby said, "Do as you want. We have no need of you. I know the place you're talking of. We'll feed you, though."

	She opened the gate and let the boy into the yard. Ada stepped to her side and looked at her face, then reached out and touched the dark hair at Ruby's neck. But Ruby twisted her neck away and did not cry or show any sign of sadness. She expressed only one concern. Should they bury the men on the mountain or bring them to Black Cove?

	"We can't just go up there and dig a hole," Ada said.

	"If it was me, I'd rather rest on the mountain than anywhere else," said Ruby.

	Ada could find no argument to that. She reached out and put her arms around Ruby for comfort, if nothing else, but Ruby just stood with her arms by her sides.

	The women made food for the boy, then started planning their journey. They packed blankets and shovels, cooking pots, matches, rope, a gun, lamps, and grain for the horse. Ruby decided that pants were more practical and they found two pairs of heavy wool hunting pants. They put on wool shirts and sweaters and big hats. Then they gave the boy food and blankets and told him to sleep in the barn until dark made it safe for him to travel. When they left leading the horse, the boy waved to them like a host saying goodbye to his guests.

	Toward evening, snow fell through fog in the woods. Ada and Ruby walked under the trees, faint shapes moving through a place that had no color except shades of gray and black. They had climbed for a long time and were now going down into a valley. Light snow was falling and for a time they walked by a stream, but then the path they were following turned back into the forest. They walked on past sunset, and the snow started falling harder.

	In time they came to an area with great flat rocks. Ruby looked around until she found the place that she was looking for, one that she had known as a child, where three rocks had fallen together to make a natural shelter. There was a little stream twenty meters away. The women gathered the driest wood they could find, made a fire at the entrance to the shelter, and boiled a pot of water for tea. Then they sat and drank it, and ate a few dried apples and dry bread.

	The temperature was dropping fast, but the fire soon heated the stones, and when Ada and Ruby wrapped themselves in blankets and buried themselves among the dry leaves, they were warm as lying in a bed at home. "This is fine," Ada thought, as she lay there. She watched the fire shadows and listened to the sound of snow in the leaves and soon she slept a dreamless sleep, not even waking when Ruby rose to put more wood on the fire.

	Next morning, they found the Pangle boy lying alone beneath the big tree, covered in snow. Ruby brushed away the snow to look at his face, and when she did she saw that he was still smiling. She put her hand to his fat cheek and then touched her fingers to his forehead.

	Ada turned from him. "Where is he?" she said.

	"No man from Georgia can tell more than half the truth," Ruby said. "Dead or alive, they took him with them."

	They started digging a deep hole, and soon they were so hot in their coats that they had to take them off. When the hole was deep enough, they went to Pangle and each took a leg and slid him into the grave. By the time they had covered him, Ada was crying, though she had seen the boy only once in life. She made a cross from two thin branches and stood it in the soft ground at Pangle's head, and though she did not say words aloud over him, she said some in her mind. Then she went through the woods to the stream and knelt and washed her hands and face. She looked around and saw a low rock that formed a kind of shelter. Under it sat Stobrod, his eyes closed and his legs crossed, with his fiddle in his lap.

	"Ruby," Ada called. "Ruby, I need you here."

	They stood over him and his face was the color of the snow, since he had lost a great deal of blood. Such a little man. Ruby put her ear to his chest and listened.

	"He's alive," she said.

	She took off his clothes and found he had been hit three times. The most serious wound was a bullet that had gone through his chest into his back. Stobrod remained unconscious while Ruby lit a match and held a knife in the flame. Then she cut into Stobrod's back and he still made no sound as she put a finger around the bullet and pulled it out.

	"You boil some water," Ruby said to Ada.

	She wandered off through the woods, returning an hour later with roots she had found that she thought could be useful. She cut them up and packed them around Stobrod's wounds, holding them there with pieces of blanket.

	After a time, she said, "It's too far home. He won't get there alive. And last night's shelter is too small for all of us. There's a place I know. If it's still there."

	They carried Stobrod across the stream in blankets and laid him over the horse, then set off, the sky flat and gray above them. They walked for some time without speaking, except when Ruby said "Here," and then they turned. After some hours, they started going down into a valley, moving toward a stream that they could hear but not see. Ada began to see shapes through the trees. Cabins. A tiny Cherokee village, a ghost town, its people forced to leave by their enemies. Ada thought of Inman's story. She wondered if any of those who had lived in the village were still alive, and if they remembered this lonely place.

	Ruby chose the best of the cabins and they took Stobrod off the horse and lay him on the dusty floor. The house had one windowless room and the rich smell of a thousand old campfires. While Ruby built a fire, Ada looked after the horse, which was wet and shaking. She looked at him and at the sky and thought that he might be dead on the ground by morning. She tried to lead him into the cabin but he did not want to go, and finally she used a big stick and hit him with it until he went in.

	It was almost dark and Ada felt tired and cold and frightened. This seemed like the loneliest place on earth. Ruby had cooked some cornmeal, but Ada could not eat it. She sat with it in her lap, exhausted and silent. Outside, the snow started to fall again.



	Chapter ten

	The Meeting

	When Inman was only a day's journey away from Black Cove, he stopped at a stream to wash himself and his clothes. He built a fire and spread the clothes on bushes near the fire to dry. He hoped to see Ada soon. He had imagined the scene many times, had seen himself walking up the road into Black Cove, exhausted, but with his courage and strength written on his face. He would be washed and in a clean suit. Ada would step out the door dressed in her fine clothes and would know him immediately. She would run to him, rushing across the yard, and then they would hold each other.

	He had seen it in his mind so often that he was now unable to imagine it any other way. He found his way to Black Cove, taking care not to follow the road until he was near the house.

	When he came to it, there was smoke from the chimney but no other sign of life. He knocked at the front door again but no one came. Then he went to the back door and knocked, and eventually an upstairs window opened and a black-haired boy asked him who he was and what he wanted.

	In time, Inman persuaded the Georgia boy to let him in. They sat by the fire and Inman heard the story of the killings. The boy gave him the best directions he could and Inman set off again, walking up the mountain.

	When he reached the place where three paths came together, there was hardly enough light for Inman to study the ground and see what story it told. There was black blood beneath a big tree where killing had been done. There had been a recent fire, and tracks led to a cross of sticks standing at the head of a hole that had been filled in.

	Inman was puzzled, because he knew that two men had been buried there, but it seemed that only one had been. There were pieces of root on the ground and he picked them up and smelled them. He looked to where the tracks led, but he could not see far before they started disappearing in the dark. So he went and sat on a rock and listened to the stream, and tried to invent a story that would explain why the two women had gone on across the mountain instead of going back home.

	But it was hard to think in the state he was in. For two days, Inman had not eaten. He looked at the roots on the ground and thought about eating them, but then he picked them up and threw them into the stream. He intended to fast until he found Ada. If she would not have him, he would go on to the heights and see if the doors of the Shining Rocks would open to him. Inman could think of no reason to hesitate. He would walk right out of this world and keep on going into that happy valley the old Cherokee Indian woman had described.

	Inman lit a fire and rolled two large stones into it to heat. For a long time he lay wrapped in his blankets with his feet to the fire. His thoughts came and went and he had no control over them. Inman was afraid that he was falling apart at a bad time. He had hoped that Ada might save him from his troubles and the bad things he had done in the last four years. But a dark voice came into his mind and said that it didn't matter how much you wished for something and prayed for it, you would never get it. You could be far too ruined, with fear and hate eating your heart so that you were ready for your hole in the ground. But another part of Inman knew that there were tracks in the snow, and that if he woke up on one more day he would follow them wherever they led.

	The fire began to die out, and he rolled the hot stones onto the ground and stretched out next to them and fell asleep. The cold woke him before dawn, and he set off to follow the tracks, although by now they were very faint. Then snow started falling again and they started to disappear. Inman began to run. But soon they had gone completely and Inman stopped in a place where the only sound was of snow falling on snow. He thought that if he lay down the snow would cover him, and when it melted it would wash the tears from his eyes.

	Ada and Ruby slept until Stobrod began coughing. Ruby went to him and his eyes opened, but he did not seem to know her. She put her hand to his forehead and said, "He's burning. Get some water and I'll put some fresh roots on his wound."

	Ada took the pot to the stream and filled it full of water, and gave some of it to the horse. As she returned to the cabin, she saw that there were a dozen wild turkeys among the leafless trees of the hillside. She went in and put the pot by the fire. Stobrod lay quiet.

	"There are turkeys on the hillside," she said.

	"The gun's over there. Go kill us one," Ruby said.

	"I've never fired a gun," said Ada.

	"It's easy." Ruby picked up the gun and showed Ada how to use it. Ada looked doubtful and Ruby said, "The worst you can do is fail to kill a turkey, and we've all done that. Go on."

	Ada followed the birds for some time, climbing when they climbed and stopping when they stopped. As she walked, she tried to be quiet and still in her movements. She did not take her eyes off them and eventually she got to the distance from them that Ruby had advised. She stood quietly and still they did not see her. Then she raised the gun slowly and fired, and to her surprise a pair fell. When Ada reached the fallen birds, she found that one was male and one female, and that their feathers shone like metal.

	***

	Inman heard a shot near where he stood. He took his gun and went forward, holding it loosely in his hand. The light was low and snow was falling and had covered the branches of the trees. He walked down into a path, and at the end he seemed to see a figure, and when it saw him it pointed a gun at him.

	A hunter, Inman guessed. He called out, saying, "I'm lost," and stepped forward slowly. First he could see the turkeys laid on the ground. Then he could see Ada's fine face on top of a strange figure wearing pants.

	"Ada Monroe?" Inman said. "Ada?"

	She did not answer but just looked at him, confused, and lowered the gun. She examined him and did not know him. His face was so thin above the beard, and he stared at her out of strange black eyes shining deep under the shadow of his hat. But Inman looked her in the eyes and knew it was Ada and felt love ringing in his soul.

	"I've been coming to you on a hard road and I'm not letting you go," he said. But something in him would not let him step forward to hold her. He held out his empty hands.

	Ada still did not know him. He seemed a madman, wandering in the storm, knapsack on his back, snow in his beard. She raised her gun again.

	"I do not know you," she said.

	When Inman heard the words, he thought, "Four years at war, but back now on home ground and I'm no better than a stranger here. This is the price I pay for the last four years."

	"I believe I have made a mistake," he said.

	He turned to walk away, to go on up to the Shining Rocks and see if they would have him. But there was no path to follow, just trees and snow and his own steps filling fast. He turned back to her and held out his empty hands again and said, "If I knew where to go, I'd go there."

	Perhaps it was something about his voice, or the angle of his face. But suddenly Ada knew him. She lowered the gun and said his name and he said yes.

	Now Ada looked at his face and saw not a madman but Inman. He was exhausted and thin, but still Inman. There was hunger written on his forehead, like a shadow over him. He needed food, warmth, kindness. In his eyes she could see that the long war and the hard road home had left his mind and heart half dead. Tears came to her eyes and she rubbed them away.

	"You come with me," she said.

	She picked up the turkeys by their feet and walked off carrying the gun on her shoulder. Inman followed and he was so tired he did not even think to offer to carry the turkeys for her. As they walked, Ada talked to Inman in the voice she had heard Ruby use to speak to the horse when it was nervous. The words did not matter. So she talked of the first thing that came to her, describing the village below and saying that it looked like a famous picture that she had seen on her travels with Monroe.

	Inman was too tired to understand what she said. He only knew that she seemed to know her destination and that something in her voice said, "This minute, I know more than you do, and I know that everything might be fine."



	Chapter eleven

	A Time to Love

	The cabin was hot and bright from the fire, and with the door shut it was hard to say if it was morning or night outside. Ruby had made coffee. Ada and Inman sat drinking it, so close to the fire that the melted snow in their coats steamed around them. Nobody said much and the place seemed tiny with four people in it.

	Stobrod moved his head from side to side. His eyes had a look of confusion and hurt in them. Then he lay still again.

	Tired and warm from the fire, Inman could not keep his eyes open. There were so many things he wanted, but the first thing he needed was sleep. Ada folded a blanket and put it on the floor. She led him to it and he stretched out and fell asleep fully clothed.

	While Inman and Stobrod slept, the snow fell and fell, and the two women spent a cold and almost wordless hour collecting wood and cleaning out another of the cabins. They built a hot fire in it, then cleaned the turkeys, put them on the end of long sticks, and roasted them all day over a slow fire. For a long time they sat close to the fire together and neither of them spoke.

	Night came, and Ruby said, "I was watching you this morning with him and I've been thinking."

	"What?" Ada asked.

	"We're just starting. I've got a picture in my mind of how that cove needs to be. It will take a long time but I know how to get there. War or peace, there's nothing we can't do ourselves. You don't need him."

	"I know I don't need him," Ada said. "But I think I want him."

	"Well, that's different."

	Ada paused, thinking hard. She knew that Inman had been alone too long, an outlier without the comfort of a human touch, a loving hand laid soft and warm on his shoulder, back, leg. And she too was lonely.

	Finally she said aloud, "I don't want to find myself someday in a new century, an old bitter woman looking back, knowing that I hadn't had the courage to follow my heart."

	***

	It was after dark when Inman woke. The fire had burned low and there was no way to tell what time of night it was. He turned and saw Stobrod, his eyes black and shining in the light. Stobrod looked at Inman and said, "Any water?"

	Inman could not see any in the room so he rose. "I'll get you a drink," he said.

	He stepped outside, and when he could see enough to walk, he went down to the stream and filled his bottle with water. He could see firelight shining yellow from the cabin where he had slept. And also from another, further down the stream. He smelled meat cooking and felt suddenly very hungry.

	He went back inside and raised Stobrod and slowly poured water into his mouth. Then he built the fire up and, leaving Stobrod asleep, he walked down to the other lighted cabin.

	"Hello," Inman said, and Ruby came to the door and looked out. "I woke up," Inman said. "I don't know how long I was asleep."

	"You've slept twelve hours or more," Ruby said, and moved so that he could come in.

	Ada sat cross-legged on the ground beside the fire, and as Inman entered she looked up at him. Her dark hair was loose on her shoulders and Inman thought her as beautiful a sight as men are allowed to see. He did not know what to with himself, but thought that he would go and sit beside her.

	Then Ada rose and did a thing he knew he would never forget. She reached behind him and put one hand on his back, at his waist. The other she pressed against his stomach.

	"You feel so thin between my hands," she said.

	Inman could think of no answer that suited the moment.

	Ada took her hands away and said, "When did you last eat?"

	Inman counted back. "Three days," he said. "Or four."

	"Well then, you must be hungry."

	Ada sat him down by the fire and gave him a plate of turkey with fried apple rings. Inman started eating hungrily, but then he stopped and said, "Are you not having any?"

	"We ate some time ago," Ada said.

	Ruby picked up a pot of soup and stood up, saying, "I'll see if I can get him to take some of this. And I'm going to clean that wound and sit with him for a time."

	After Ruby left, neither Inman nor Ada could think of anything much to say. Inman began commenting on the food, but then he stopped and felt foolish. He wanted to lie on the blankets with Ada beside him and hold her close. He knew that it had taken all her courage to touch him as she had. Now he had to find a way to say what he had to say.

	He went and sat behind her, then reached around her and pressed the inside of his wrists and arms against her shoulders.

	"Did you write me letters while I was in the hospital?" he said.

	"Several," she said. "But I did not know you were there until you were gone. So the first two letters went to Virginia."

	"Tell me what they were about," he said.

	Ada described them, and Inman said, "I'd love to have read them." He held his hands to the fire and said, "Twenty-six years since a fire was lit here."

	This gave them a topic, and they sat for a time talking about the Cherokee village, imagining the lives that had been lived in that place. When they had finished, they sat quietly, and then Inman told Ada how, all the way home, his only hope was that she would have him, would marry him. But now, he said, he could not ask her to do so. Not to a man as ruined as he was.

	"I'm ruined beyond repair, I fear," he said.

	Ada turned and looked at him over her shoulder. She could see the white wound at his neck, and there were other wounds in the look of his face and in his eyes, which could not quite meet hers.

	She turned back. She knew that cures of all sorts exist in the natural world. Even the most hidden root had a use. She had learned this, at least, from Ruby.

	Without looking at him, she said, "I know people can be healed. Not all, but some can be. Why not you?"

	"Why not me?" said Inman, testing the thought. He reached to Ada's dark hair, which lay loose on her back, and lifted it. Leaning forward, he touched his lips to the back of her neck and kissed the top of her head. Then he leaned back and pulled her against him, her waist into his stomach, her shoulders into his chest.

	He held her tight and words poured out of him. He told her about the first time he had looked on the back of her neck as she sat in church. Of the feeling that had never let go of him since. He talked of the wasted years between then and now, and how you never get back the things you have lost. They will always stay lost. You can only choose to go on or not, and if you go on, you carry your wounds with you. But during all those wasted years, he had had the wish to kiss her there at the back of her neck, and now he had done it.

	Ada knew that Inman was trying to thank her for the touch she had given him when he entered the cabin. She lifted her hair from her shoulders and put her head slightly forward.

	"Do that once more," she said.

	But there was a sound at the door and Ruby came in, and saw the two looking uncomfortable. Nobody said anything.

	"His fever's down now," Ruby said finally.

	Inman returned to the other cabin to sleep. As he lay there, he tried to decide which part of the evening he had enjoyed most, Ada's hand on his stomach or her request just before Ruby opened the door. He was still trying to decide when he fell asleep.

	The next day was gray and even colder, with snow falling soft and fine. They all slept late, and Inman took breakfast in the women's hut. Then, later in the morning, Ada and Inman fed and watered the horse and went hunting together. They walked up the hill and found nothing moving in the woods, not even animal tracks in the snow. Eventually, they came to a flat rock, and Inman brushed the snow from it, and they sat cross-legged facing each other, knee to knee.

	Ada began talking. She wanted to tell how she had become what she was. They were different people now. He needed to know that. She told of Monroe's death, and about deciding not to return to Charleston, and all about Ruby. About weather and animals and plants and the things that she was starting to know. She still missed Monroe more than she could say, and she told Inman many wonderful things about him. But she told as well one terrible thing: that he had tried to keep her a child, and that he had mostly succeeded.

	"And there's something you need to know about Ruby," Ada said. "Whatever happens between you and me, I want her to stay in Black Cove as long as she wants. If she never leaves, I'll be glad."

	"Could she learn to accept me? That's the question," Inman said.

	"I think she can," Ada said. "If you understand she is not a servant but my friend."

	They returned to the village that afternoon carrying only wood for the fire. They found Ruby sitting by Stobrod. He seemed to know Ruby and Ada, but he was frightened of Inman.

	"Who's that big, dark man?" he said.

	Ruby wet a cloth and cleaned his face, and when she was done he immediately fell asleep. Ada looked at Inman, the tiredness in his face. She said, "I believe you ought to do the same."

	"Just don't let me sleep past dark," Inman said. He went out and returned a minute later with a pile of wood for the fire. Then he left and the two women built the fire up and sat together for a long time with their backs against the cabin wall, a blanket around them. Then they slept, and when they woke it was almost dark. Ruby went to check Stobrod.

	"His fever's up again," she said. "He'll stay or go, but tonight will decide. I'd better not leave him."

	Ada came over and felt Stobrod's forehead. It did not feel too hot to her. She looked at Ruby but Ruby would not look back.

	It was dark when Ada walked down the stream to the other cabin. She opened the door quietly and entered. Inman lay asleep and did not move. The fire had burned low. Ada took off her coat and put three branches on the fire, then went to Inman and knelt beside him. She touched his forehead and stroked his hair. He woke slowly, turning to look at her, but then his eyes closed and he slept again.

	The world was such a terribly lonely place, and the only cure seemed to be to lie down beside him, skin to skin. Ada felt very frightened, but she put the fear away from her and started undoing the buttons on her pants. They were almost off when she looked towards Inman and found his eyes open, watching her.

	"Turn your back," she said.

	"Not for all the gold dollars in the world," Inman said.

	She turned away from him, nervous and uncomfortable. But he leaned forward and pulled the clothes from her hands, and pulled her to him. Gently, he moved his hands up and down her, then pressed his forehead to her soft stomach and kissed her there. He pulled her against him and held her and held her. She put a hand to the back of his neck and pulled him harder, and then she pressed her white arms against him. And for a time that night, the cabin was a place that held within its walls no pain or even a faint memory of pain.

	Later, Ada and Inman lay holding each other as the branches smoked in the fire and the snow whispered as it fell. And they did what lovers often do when they think the future stretches endlessly before them; they talked of the past, through most of the night, describing their childhood and youth in great detail. When they reached the war years, Inman only described them very generally and said little about himself.

	"Then tell me of your long journey home," Ada said.

	Inman thought about it, but then he let himself imagine that he had at last reached the end of his troubles. He had no wish to revisit them, so he told only of how on his journey he had watched the nights of the moon and counted them to twenty- eight and then started all over again.

	Then he added, "I met a number of people on the way. There was a goatswoman that fed me."

	They turned to the future and started talking about their plans. They imagined their marriage, the years passing happy and peaceful, with Black Cove organized according to Ruby's plans. Ada described these plans in detail and the only thing Inman requested was that they should keep a few goats. In fall the apple trees would be bright and heavy with apples and they would hunt birds together, and in summer they would catch fish. They were both at the age when they could think in one part of their minds that their whole lives stretched in front of them. At the same time another part guessed that their youth was almost finished for them and that a very different country lay ahead.



	Chapter twelve

	The Last Goodbye

	By the morning of the third day in the village, the sky had cleared and there was bright sun. The snow began to melt, dropping from the bent branches of trees, and all day there was the sound of water running under the snow on the ground. That evening the moon was full and its bright light threw shadows of tree trunks on the snow.

	Ada and Inman lay under the covers for some time, talking, with the fire low and the door to the cabin open, letting a bar of cold moonlight shine onto their bed. They made a plan for themselves and discussed it for much of the night. They felt certain that the South was going to lose the war, which could not go on many more months. It certainly would not continue past late summer. The choices were these. Inman could return to the army. He would immediately be sent back to Petersburg, where he would try not to get killed and hope for an early end to the war. Or he could stay hidden in the mountains or in Black Cove as an outlier and be hunted like a wild animal. Or he could cross the mountains north and give himself up to the Federals. They would make him sign a document saying he was loyal to their cause, but then he could wait for the fighting to end and come home.

	They tried to think of other plans, but finally they had to accept that the three original choices, although they were hard, were the only ones the war allowed. Inman could not accept the first suggestion. Ada felt that the second was too dangerous. So they decided on the third. Over the mountains. Three days or four of steady walking, and then he would cross into the next state, put up his hands, and say that the South had been beaten.

	In the end, they both promised to keep in their minds Inman's return home in three or four months' time. They would go forward from there into whatever new world the war left behind. And they would do their best to create the future that they had imagined in their talks two nights ago.

	***

	On the fourth day in the village, brown leaves and black dirt started to appear on the ground. That day Stobrod could sit up without support and they could mostly understand what he said. His wounds were clean and he could eat solid food. By the fifth day, the snow was more than half gone and Stobrod announced that he was ready to travel.

	"Six hours home," Ruby said. "Seven at most."

	Ada thought that they would all go as a group, but Inman would not allow it.

	"Why put everyone in danger, when it's us they want," he said, pointing in Stobrod's direction.

	He suggested that Ruby and Ada walk on ahead while he and Stobrod followed a short way behind, with Stobrod on the horse. They would wait in the woods until dark. The next morning, he would start on his journey into the next state. The women would keep Stobrod hidden at home, and if the war had not ended by the time he had healed, they would send him across the mountains to join Inman.

	Stobrod had no opinion on the matter, but Ruby agreed with Inman, so that is what they did. The women started walking, and Inman stood and watched them climb the hillside. When Ada disappeared into the trees, a part of the richness of the world seemed to go with her. He had been alone in the world and empty for so long. But she filled him full, and he believed that perhaps everything that had been taken out of him had been for a purpose. To clear space for something better.

	He waited for a time and then put Stobrod on the horse and followed, passing Pangle's grave, still covered with snow. They traveled for some distance, dark clouds floating above them, the path rough and steep. Then they heard sounds behind them and turned to see horsemen on the path.

	"Good God," Stobrod said.

	Teague said, "That's a hard man to kill."

	Stobrod looked at the men and recognized Teague and the boy he kept at his side. The other three men he did not know.

	Inman looked around to see what protection there was. He wanted a stone wall, but there was none. He studied the Guards and he knew them by the look in their eye. There was no point in talking with such men. Language would change nothing. He hit the horse hard with his left hand and pulled out his pistol with his right, shooting one of the men in a single movement. Stobrod's horse went running down the path and disappeared into the trees.

	There was a moment of stillness, and then a great deal of movement. The horses all jumped and the riders pulled at their heads to calm them down. Inman ran straight at the group. There was no wall to get behind, no hope to do anything except run into them and try to kill them all.

	He shot one rider off his horse. That left only three, and one was already moving away toward the trees. Inman fired again and a horse came down, falling on the leg of one of the riders, who shouted in pain. The other horse started spinning out of control and Teague almost came off. Inman ran to him and pulled the gun from his hand.

	The two men looked each other in the eyes, and Teague pulled out a long knife and shouted, "I'll blacken my knife with your blood."

	Inman fired and the bullet hit Teague in the chest. He fell to the ground, screaming and swearing. Inman hit him on the side of the head with his gun and the man stopped screaming.

	Inman looked around for the last rider. He expected the man to have run away, but he found him about fifty meters away, hiding behind a tree. Inman saw that he was only a boy and that he had lost his hat. His head was white. He probably had German or Dutch blood in him, but he was now American, white skin, white hair, and a killer. He looked very young and Inman did not want to shoot a boy.

	"Come out of there," Inman said, making his voice loud enough to be heard.

	Nothing. The boy stayed behind the tree.

	"Come on," Inman said. "I'm not asking again. Put down your gun and you can ride home."

	"No, sir," the boy said. "Here's fine."

	"Listen," Inman said. "I'm looking for a way not to kill you."

	"And I'm looking for a way to finish you," said the boy.

	Inman pointed his gun at the tree. "You're going to have to come out from behind that tree sometime," he said.

	The boy and his horse rode off through the woods and Inman went after him. They chased each other, using the trees to hide behind, and the horse became confused and started jumping around, throwing the boy off her. He lay in the snow where he had fallen. Then he half sat and put his hand to his gun.

	"Put that thing down," Inman said. He had his gun pointed at the boy.

	The boy looked at him and his blue eyes were empty as ice. He looked white in the face, a little blond thing, his hair cut close to his head. Only his hand moved, and it moved quicker than you could see.

	Inman suddenly lay on the ground.

	The boy sat and looked at him and then looked at the pistol in his hand.

	Ada heard the gunshots in the distance, dry and thin as sticks breaking. She did not say anything to Ruby. She just turned and ran. Her hat flew off her head and she kept running and left it on the ground like a shadow behind her. She met Stobrod, holding tight onto his horse.

	"Back there," Stobrod said.

	When she reached the place, the boy had already gathered the horses and gone. She went to the men on the ground and looked at them, and then she found Inman lying apart from them. She sat and held him in her lap. He tried to talk, but she silenced him. He floated in and out of a bright dream of home. It had a stream rising out of rock, black dirt fields, old trees. In his dream the year seemed to be happening all at one time, all the seasons coming together. Apple trees heavy with fruit and flowers, ice around the stream, red fall leaves floating down on summer roses.

	From a distance it looked like a charming scene in the winter woods. A stream, a pair of lovers. The man lying with his head in the woman's lap. She looking down into his eyes, stroking his hair. He putting an arm around the softness of her body. Both touching each other with great closeness. A scene of such quiet and peace that the observer could imagine that long years of happy union stretched ahead of the two on the ground.



	Chapter thirteen

	October, 1874

	Even after all this time and three children together, Ada still found them holding each other at the strangest moments. Earlier that day it had been out in the potato field. They had stood, their legs wide, each with one arm around the other, the other hand on their shovels. Ada had found them standing there, and had wanted to make a comment but had said nothing.

	The Georgia boy had never gone back home, and had become a man in Black Cove. Ruby had kept him working hard for two years and she did not stop when he became her husband. His name was Reid. Their babies had been born eighteen months apart, all boys, with thick black hair and shiny brown eyes. They were growing into short, strong boys with pink cheeks and happy smiles, and Ruby made them work hard and play hard.

	Now, late in the afternoon, the three boys sat around a fire behind the house. Four small chickens were roasting over the fire as the boys argued about who should turn them.

	Ada watched them as she spread a cloth on the small table under the apple tree, and placed eight plates on it. October, 1874 was as tine as the month can be in the mountains. It had been dry and warm and clear for weeks, and the leaves were half red and half green. The color of Cold Mountain behind the house changed each day, and if you watched closely, you could follow the red as it came down the mountain and spread into the cove like a wave breaking over you slowly.

	Soon, with an hour of daylight left, Ruby came out from the kitchen. At her side was a tall girl of nine, both of them carrying baskets of potato salad, corn, corn bread, green beans. Reid took the chickens from the fire and Ruby and the girl spread the food on the table. Stobrod came and put a bucket of milk by the table. They all took their places.

	Later, as the sun was setting, Stobrod took out his fiddle and played, while the children ran around the fire and shouted. They were not dancing but just running to the music, and the girl waved a burning stick until Ada told her to stop it.

	The girl said, "But Mama," and Ada shook her head. The girl came and kissed her cheek and danced away and threw the stick into the flames.

	When Stobrod at last stopped playing, the children sat down by the fire. Ada took a book and began to read them a story. She turned the pages with slight difficulty because she had lost the end of the first finger on her right hand four years previously. She had been up on the hill cutting trees and had by accident taken her fingertip off. Ruby had cared for it, and a year later it had healed so well that you hardly noticed the difference.

	When Ada reached the end of the story, the night was growing cool and she put the book away. The children were sleepy, and morning would come as early and demanding as always. It was time to put out the fire and go inside and lock the door.





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	On an exceptionally hot evening early in July a young man came out of the garret in which he lodged in S. Place and walked slowly, as though in hesitation, towards K. bridge.

	He had successfully avoided meeting his landlady on the staircase. His garret was under the roof of a high, five-storied house and was more like a cupboard than a room.

	The landlady who provided him with garret, dinners, and attendance, lived on the floor below, and every time he went out he was obliged to pass her kitchen, the door of which invariably stood open.

	And each time he passed, the young man had a sick, frightened feeling, which made him scowl and feel ashamed. He was hopelessly in debt to his landlady, and was afraid of meeting her.

	This was not because he was cowardly and abject, quite the contrary; but for some time past he had been in an overstrained irritable condition, verging on hypochondria.

	He had become so completely absorbed in himself, and isolated from his fellows that he dreaded meeting, not only his landlady, but anyone at all.

	He was crushed by poverty, but the anxieties of his position had of late ceased to weigh upon him. He had given up attending to matters of practical importance; he had lost all desire to do so.

	Nothing that any landlady could do had a real terror for him. But to be stopped on the stairs, to be forced to listen to her trivial, irrelevant gossip, to pestering demands for payment, threats and complaints, and to rack his brains for excuses, to prevaricate, to lie - no, rather than that, he would creep down the stairs like a cat and slip out unseen.

	This evening, however, on coming out into the street, he became acutely aware of his fears.

	"I want to attempt a thing like that and am frightened by these trifles," he thought, with an odd smile. "Hm... yes, all is in a man's hands and he lets it all slip from cowardice, that's an axiom.

	It would be interesting to know what it is men are most afraid of. Taking a new step, uttering a new word is what they fear most. But I am talking too much. It's because I chatter that I do nothing. Or perhaps it is that I chatter because I do nothing.

	I've learned to chatter this last month, lying for days together in my den thinking of Jack the Giant-killer. Why am I going there now? Am I capable of that? Is that serious? It is not serious at all. It's simply a fantasy to amuse myself; a plaything! Yes, maybe it is a plaything."

	The heat in the street was terrible: and the airlessness, the bustle and the plaster, scaffolding, bricks, and dust all about him, and that special Petersburg stench, so familiar to all who are unable to get out of town in summer-all worked painfully upon the young man's already overwrought nerves.

	The insufferable stench from the pothouses, which are particularly numerous in that part of the town, and the drunken men whom he met continually, although it was a working day, completed the revolting misery of the picture. An expression of the profoundest disgust gleamed for a moment in the young man's refined face.

	He was, by the way, exceptionally handsome, above the average in height, slim, well-built, with beautiful dark eyes and dark brown hair.

	Soon he sank into deep thought, or more accurately speaking into a complete blankness of mind; he walked along not observing what was about him and not caring to observe it. From time to time, he would mutter something, from the habit of talking to himself, to which he had just confessed.

	At these moments he would become conscious that his ideas were sometimes in a tangle and that he was very weak; for two days he had scarcely tasted food.

	He was so badly dressed that even a man accustomed to shabbiness would have been ashamed to be seen in the street in such rags. In that quarter of the town, however, scarcely any shortcoming in dress would have created surprise.

	Owing to the proximity of the Hay Market, the number of establishments of bad character, the preponderance of the trading and working class population crowded in these streets and alleys in the heart of Petersburg, types so various were to be seen in the streets that no figure, however queer, would have caused surprise.

	But there was such accumulated bitterness and contempt in the young man's heart, that, in spite of all the fastidiousness of youth, he minded his rags least of all in the street. It was a different matter when he met with acquaintances or with former fellow students, whom, indeed, he disliked meeting at any time.

	And yet when a drunken man who, for some unknown reason, was being taken somewhere in a huge waggon dragged by a heavy dray horse, suddenly shouted at him as he drove past:

	"Hey there, German hatter" bawling at the top of his voice and pointing at him - the young man stopped suddenly and clutched tremulously at his hat. It was a tall round hat from Zimmerman's, but completely worn out, rusty with age, all torn and bespattered, brimless and bent on one side in a most unseemly fashion. Not shame, however, but quite another feeling akin to terror had overtaken him.

	"I knew it," he muttered in confusion, "I thought so! That's the worst of all! Why, a stupid thing like this, the most trivial detail might spoil the whole plan. Yes, my hat is too noticeable. It looks absurd and that makes it noticeable. With my rags I ought to wear a cap, any sort of old pancake, but not this grotesque thing.

	Nobody wears such a hat, it would be noticed a mile off, it would be remembered. What matters is that people would remember it, and that would give them a clue. For this business one should be as little conspicuous as possible. Trifles, trifles are what matter! Why, it's just such trifles that always ruin everything."

	He had not far to go; he knew indeed how many steps it was from the gate of his lodging house: exactly seven hundred and thirty. He had counted them once when he had been lost in dreams. At the time he had put no faith in those dreams and was only tantalising himself by their hideous but daring recklessness.

	Now, a month later, he had begun to look upon them differently, and, in spite of the monologues in which he jeered at his own impotence and indecision, he had involuntarily come to regard this "hideous" dream as an exploit to be attempted, although he still did not realise this himself. He was positively going now for a "rehearsal" of his project, and at every step his excitement grew more and more violent.

	With a sinking heart and a nervous tremor, he went up to a huge house which on one side looked on to the canal, and on the other into the street. This house was let out in tiny tenements and was inhabited by working people of all kinds - tailors, locksmiths, cooks, Germans of sorts, girls picking up a living as best they could, petty clerks, etc. There was a continual coming and going through the two gates and in the two courtyards of the house.

	Three or four door-keepers were employed on the building. The young man was very glad to meet none of them, and at once slipped unnoticed through the door on the right, and up the staircase. It was a back staircase, dark and narrow, but he was familiar with it already, and knew his way, and he liked all these surroundings: in such darkness even the most inquisitive eyes were not to be dreaded.

	"If I am so scared now, what would it be if it somehow came to pass that I were really going to do it?" he could not help asking himself as he reached the fourth storey. There his progress was barred by some porters who were engaged in moving furniture out of a flat.

	He knew that the flat had been occupied by a German clerk in the civil service, and his family. This German was moving out then, and so the fourth floor on this staircase would be untenanted except by the old woman. "That's a good thing anyway," he thought to himself, as he rang the bell of the old woman's flat.

	The bell gave a faint tinkle as though it were made of tin and not of copper. The little flats in such houses always have bells that ring like that. He had forgotten the note of that bell, and now its peculiar tinkle seemed to remind him of something and to bring it clearly before him. He started, his nerves were terribly overstrained by now.

	In a little while, the door was opened a tiny crack: the old woman eyed her visitor with evident distrust through the crack, and nothing could be seen but her little eyes, glittering in the darkness. But, seeing a number of people on the landing, she grew bolder, and opened the door wide. The young man stepped into the dark entry, which was partitioned off from the tiny kitchen. The old woman stood facing him in silence and looking inquiringly at him.

	She was a diminutive, withered up old woman of sixty, with sharp malignant eyes and a sharp little nose. Her colourless, somewhat grizzled hair was thickly smeared with oil, and she wore no kerchief over it.

	Round her thin long neck, which looked like a hen's leg, was knotted some sort of flannel rag, and, in spite of the heat, there hung flapping on her shoulders, a mangy fur cape, yellow with age.

	The old woman coughed and groaned at every instant. The young man must have looked at her with a rather peculiar expression, for a gleam of mistrust came into her eyes again.

	"Raskolnikov, a student, I came here a month ago," the young man made haste to mutter, with a half bow, remembering that he ought to be more polite.

	"I remember, my good sir, I remember quite well your coming here," the old woman said distinctly, still keeping her inquiring eyes on his face.

	"And here I am again on the same errand," Raskolnikov continued, a little disconcerted and surprised at the old woman's mistrust. "Perhaps she is always like that though, only I did not notice it the other time," he thought with an uneasy feeling.

	The old woman paused, as though hesitating; then stepped on one side, and pointing to the door of the room, she said, letting her visitor pass in front of her:

	"Step in, my good sir."

	The little room into which the young man walked, with yellow paper on the walls, geraniums and muslin curtains in the windows, was brightly lighted up at that moment by the setting sun.

	"So the sun will shine like this then too!" flashed as it were by chance through Raskolnikov's mind, and with a rapid glance he scanned everything in the room, trying as far as possible to notice and remember its arrangement.

	But there was nothing special in the room. The furniture, all very old and of yellow wood, consisted of a sofa with a huge bent wooden back, an oval table in front of the sofa, a dressing-table with a looking-glass fixed on it between the windows, chairs along the walls and two or three half-penny prints in yellow frames, representing German damsels with birds in their hands-that was all.

	In the corner a light was burning before a small ikon. Everything was very clean; the floor and the furniture were brightly polished; everything shone.

	"Lizaveta's work," thought the young man. There was not a speck of dust to be seen in the whole flat.

	"It's in the houses of spiteful old widows that one finds such cleanliness," Raskolnikov thought again, and he stole a curious glance at the cotton curtain over the door leading into another tiny room, in which stood the old woman's bed and chest of drawers and into which he had never looked before. These two rooms made up the whole flat.

	"What do you want?" the old woman said severely, coming into the room and, as before, standing in front of him so as to look him straight in the face.

	"I've brought something to pawn here," and he drew out of his pocket an old-fashioned flat silver watch, on the back of which was engraved a globe; the chain was of steel.

	"But the time is up for your last pledge. The month was up the day before yesterday."

	"I will bring you the interest for another month; wait a little."

	"But that's for me to do as I please, my good sir, to wait or to sell your pledge at once."

	"How much will you give me for the watch, Alyona Ivanovna?"

	"You come with such trifles, my good sir, it's scarcely worth anything. I gave you two roubles last time for your ring and one could buy it quite new at a jeweler's for a rouble and a half."

	"Give me four roubles for it, I shall redeem it, it was my father's. I shall be getting some money soon."

	"A rouble and a half, and interest in advance, if you like!"

	"A rouble and a half!" cried the young man.

	"Please yourself - and the old woman handed him back the watch. The young man took it, and was so angry that he was on the point of going away; but checked himself at once, remembering that there was nowhere else he could go, and that he had had another object also in coming."

	"Hand it over," he said roughly.

	The old woman fumbled in her pocket for her keys, and disappeared behind the curtain into the other room. The young man, left standing alone in the middle of the room, listened inquisitively, thinking. He could hear her unlocking the chest of drawers.

	"It must be the top drawer," he reflected. "So she carries the keys in a pocket on the right. All in one bunch on a steel ring. And there's one key there, three times as big as all the others, with deep notches; that can't be the key of the chest of drawers then there must be some other chest or strong-box that's worth knowing. Strong-boxes always have keys like that but how degrading it all is."

	The old woman came back.

	"Here, sir: as we say ten copecks the rouble a month, so I must take fifteen copecks from a rouble and a half for the month in advance. But for the two roubles I lent you before, you owe me now twenty copecks on the same reckoning in advance. That makes thirty - five copecks altogether. So I must give you a rouble and fifteen copecks for the watch. Here it is."

	"What! Only a rouble and fifteen copecks now!"

	"Just so."

	The young man did not dispute it and took the money. He looked at the old woman, and was in no hurry to get away, as though there was still something he wanted to say or to do, but he did not himself quite know what.

	"I may be bringing you something else in a day or two, Alyona Ivanovna - a valuable thing-silver-a cigarette-box, as soon as I get it back from a friend he broke off in confusion.

	"Well, we will talk about it then, sir."

	"Good-bye-are you always at home alone, your sister is not here with you?" He asked her as casually as possible as he went out into the passage.

	"What business is she of yours, my good sir?"

	"Oh, nothing particular, I simply asked. You are too quick. Good day, Alyona Ivanovna."

	Raskolnikov went out in complete confusion. This confusion became more and more intense. As he went down the stairs, he even stopped short, two or three times, as though suddenly struck by some thought. When he was in the street he cried out,

	"Oh, God, how loathsome it all is and can I, can I possibly. No, it's nonsense, it's rubbish!" he added resolutely. "And how could such an atrocious thing come into my head? What filthy things my heart is capable of. Yes, filthy above all, disgusting, loathsome, loathsome! - and for a whole month I've been."

	But no words, no exclamations, could express his agitation. The feeling of intense repulsion, which had begun to oppress and torture his heart while he was on his way to the old woman, had by now reached such a pitch and had taken such a definite form that he did not know what to do with himself to escape from his wretchedness.

	He walked along the pavement like a drunken man, regardless of the passers- by, and jostling against them, and only came to his senses when he was in the next street.

	Looking round, he noticed that he was standing close to a tavern which was entered by steps leading from the pavement to the basement. At that instant two drunken men came out at the door, and abusing and supporting one another, they mounted the steps.

	Without stopping to think, Raskolnikov went down the steps at once. Till that moment he had never been into a tavern, but now he felt giddy and was tormented by a burning thirst.

	He longed for a drink of cold beer, and attributed his sudden weakness to the want of food. He sat down at a sticky little table in a dark and dirty corner; ordered some beer, and eagerly drank off the first glassful. At once he felt easier; and his thoughts became clear.

	"All that's nonsense," he said hopefully, "and there is nothing in it all to worry about! It's simply physical derangement. Just a glass of beer, a piece of dry bread - and in one moment the brain is stronger, the mind is clearer and the will is firm! Phew, how utterly petty it all is!"

	"He met the one he used to know."

	But in spite of this scornful reflection, he was by now looking cheerful as though he were suddenly set free from a terrible burden: and he gazed round in a friendly way at the people in the room. But even at that moment he had a dim foreboding that this happier frame of mind was also not normal.

	There were few people at the time in the tavern. Besides the two drunken men he had met on the steps, a group consisting of about five men and a girl with a concertina had gone out at the same time.

	Their departure left the room quiet and rather empty. The persons still in the tavern were a man who appeared to be an artisan, drunk, but not extremely so, sitting before a pot of beer, and his companion, a huge, stout man with a grey beard, in a short full- skirted coat. He was very drunk: and had dropped asleep on the bench; every now and then, he began as though in his sleep, cracking his fingers, with his arms wide apart and the upper part of his body bounding about on the bench, while he hummed some meaningless refrain, trying to recall some such lines as these:

	"His wife a year he fondly loved His wife a-a year he - fondly loved."

	Or suddenly waking up again:

	"Walking along the crowded row

	But no one shared his enjoyment: his silent companion looked with positive hostility and mistrust at all these manifestations. There was another man in the room who looked somewhat like a retired government clerk. He was sitting apart, now and then sipping from his pot and looking round at the company. He, too, appeared to be in some agitation.

	The master of the establishment was in another room, but he frequently came down some steps into the main room, his jaunty, tarred boots with red turn-over tops coming into view each time before the rest of his person.

	He wore a full coat and a horribly greasy black satin waistcoat, with no cravat, and his whole face seemed smeared with oil like an iron lock.

	At the counter stood a boy of about fourteen, and there was another boy somewhat younger who handed whatever was wanted. On the counter lay some sliced cucumber, some pieces of dried black bread, and some fish, chopped up small, all smelling very bad.

	It was insufferably close, and so heavy with the fumes of spirits that five minutes in such an atmosphere might well make a man drunk.

	There are chance meetings with strangers that interest us from the first moment, before a word is spoken. Such was the impression made on Raskolnikov by the person sitting a little distance from him, who looked like a retired clerk.

	The young man often recalled this impression afterwards, and even ascribed it to presentiment. He looked repeatedly at the clerk, partly no doubt because the latter was staring persistently at him, obviously anxious to enter into conversation.

	At the other persons in the room, including the tavern- keeper, the clerk looked as though he were used to their company, and weary of it, showing a shade of condescending contempt for them as persons of station and culture inferior to his own, with whom it would be useless for him to converse.

	He was a man over fifty, bald and grizzled, of medium height, and stoutly built. His face, bloated from continual drinking, was of a yellow, even greenish, tinge, with swollen eyelids out of which keen reddish eyes gleamed like little chinks. But there was something very strange in him; there was a light in his eyes as though of intense feeling - perhaps there were even thought and intelligence, but at the same time there was a gleam of something like madness.

	He was wearing an old and hopelessly ragged black dress coat, with all its buttons missing except one, and that one he had buttoned, evidently clinging to this last trace of respectability.

	A crumpled shirt front, covered with spots and stains, protruded from his canvas waistcoat. Like a clerk, he wore no beard, nor moustache, but had been so long unshaven that his chin looked like a stiff greyish brush.

	And there was something respectable and like an official about his manner too. But he was restless; he ruffled up his hair and from time to time let his head drop into his hands dejectedly resting his ragged elbows on the stained and sticky table. At last he looked straight at Raskolnikov, and said loudly and resolutely:

	"May I venture, honoured sir, to engage you in polite conversation? Forasmuch as, though your exterior would not command respect, my experience admonishes me that you are a man of education and not accustomed to drinking. I have always respected education when in conjunction with genuine sentiments, and I am besides a titular counsellor in rank. Marmeladov - such is my name; titular counsellor. I make bold to inquire-have you been in the service?"

	"No, I am studying," answered the young man, somewhat surprised at the grandiloquent style of the speaker and also at being so directly addressed.

	In spite of the momentary desire he had just been feeling for company of any sort, on being actually spoken to he felt immediately his habitual irritable and uneasy aversion for any stranger who approached or attempted to approach him.

	"A student then, or formerly a student," cried the clerk. "Just what I thought! I'm a man of experience, immense experience, sir," and he tapped his forehead with his fingers in self-approval. "You've been a student or have attended some learned institution! But allow me."

	He got up, staggered, took up his jug and glass, and sat down beside the young man, facing him a little sideways. He was drunk, but spoke fluently and boldly, only occasionally losing the thread of his sentences and drawling his words.

	He pounced upon Raskolnikov as greedily as though he too had not spoken to a soul for a month.

	"Honoured sir," he began almost with solemnity, "poverty is not a vice, that's a true saying. Yet I know too that drunkenness is not a virtue, and that that's even truer. But beggary, honoured sir, beggary is a vice.

	In poverty you may still retain your innate nobility of soul, but in beggary - never-no one.

	For beggary a man is not chased out of human society with a stick, he is swept out with a broom, so as to make it as humiliating as possible; and quite right, too, forasmuch as in beggary I am ready to be the first to humiliate myself.

	Hence the pot-house! Honoured sir, a month ago Mr. Lebeziatnikov gave my wife a beating, and my wife is a very different matter from me!

	Do you understand? Allow me to ask you another question out of simple curiosity: have you ever spent a night on a hay barge, on the Neva?"

	"No, I have not happened to," answered Raskolnikov. "What do you mean?"

	"Well, I've just come from one and it's the fifth night I've slept so."

	He filled his glass, emptied it and paused. Bits of hay were in fact clinging to his clothes and sticking to his hair. It seemed quite probable that he had not undressed or washed for the last five days. His hands, particularly, were filthy. They were fat and red, with black nails.

	His conversation seemed to excite a general though languid interest. The boys at the counter fell to sniggering. The innkeeper came down from the upper room, apparently on purpose to listen to the "funny fellow" and sat down at a little distance, yawning lazily, but with dignity.

	Evidently Marmeladov was a familiar figure here, and he had most likely acquired his weakness for high- flown speeches from the habit of frequently entering into conversation with strangers of all sorts in the tavern. This habit develops into a necessity in some drunkards, and especially in those who are looked after sharply and kept in order at home.

	Hence in the company of other drinkers they try to justify themselves and even if possible obtain consideration.

	"Funny fellow!" pronounced the innkeeper. "And why don't you work, why aren't you at your duty, if you are in the service?"

	"Why am I not at my duty, honoured sir," Marmeladov went on, addressing himself exclusively to Raskolnikov, as though it had been he who put that question to him. "Why am I not at my duty?

	Does not my heart ache to think what a useless worm I am? A month ago when Mr. Lebeziatnikov beat my wife with his own hands, and I lay drunk, didn't I suffer? Excuse me, young man, has it ever happened to you well, to petition hopelessly for a loan?"

	"Yes, it has. But what do you mean by hopelessly?"

	"Hopelessly in the fullest sense, when you know beforehand that you will get nothing by it. You know, for instance, beforehand with positive certainty that this man, this most reputable and exemplary citizen, will on no consideration give you money; and indeed I ask you why should he? For he knows of course that I shan't pay it back. From compassion? But Mr. Lebeziatnikov who keeps up with modern ideas explained the other day that compassion is forbidden nowadays by science itself, and that that's what is done now in England, where there is political economy. Why, I ask you, should he give it to me? And yet though I know beforehand that he won't, I set off to him and."

	"Why do you go?" put in Raskolnikov.

	"Well, when one has no one, nowhere else one can go! For every man must have somewhere to go. Since there are times when one absolutely must go somewhere! When my own daughter first went out with a yellow ticket, then I had to go (for my daughter has a yellow passport)," he added in parenthesis, looking with a certain uneasiness at the young man.

	"No matter, sir, no matter!" he went on hurriedly and with apparent composure when both the boys at the counter guffawed and even the innkeeper smiled.

	"No matter, for everyone knows everything about it already, and all that is secret is made open. And I accept it all, not with contempt, but with humility. So be it! So be it! 'Behold the man!' Excuse me, young man, can you no, to put it more strongly and more distinctly, not can you but dare you, looking upon me, assert that I am not a pig?"

	The young man did not answer a word.

	"Well," the orator began again stolidly and with even increased dignity, after waiting for the laughter in the room to subside. "Well, so be it, I am a pig, but she is a lady! I have the semblance of a beast, but Katerina Ivanovna, my spouse, is a person of education and an officer's daughter.

	Granted, granted, I am a scoundrel, but she is a woman of a noble heart, full of sentiments, refined by education. And yet oh, if only she felt for me! Honoured sir, honoured sir, you know every man ought to have at least one place where people feel for him! But Katerina Ivanovna, though she is magnanimous, she is unjust. And yet, although I realise that when she pulls my hair she only does it out of pity-for I repeat without being ashamed, she pulls my hair, young man," he declared with redoubled dignity, hearing the sniggering again-

	"But, my God, if she would but once. But no, no! It's all in vain and it's no use talking! No use talking! For more than once, my wish did come true and more than once she has felt for me but, such is my fate and I am a beast by nature!"

	"Rather!" assented the innkeeper yawning. Marmeladov struck his fist resolutely on the table.

	"Such is my fate! Do you know, sir, do you know, I have sold her very stockings for drink? Not her shoes-that would be more or less in the order of things, but her stockings, her stockings I have sold for drink! Her mohair shawl I sold for drink, a present to her long ago, her own property, not mine; and we live in a cold room and she caught cold this winter and has begun coughing and spitting blood too.

	We have three little children and Katerina Ivanovna is at work from morning till night; she is scrubbing and cleaning and washing the children, for she's been used to cleanliness from a child. But her chest is weak and she has a tendency to consumption and I feel it! Do you suppose I don't feel it? And the more I drink the more I feel it. That's why I drink too. I try to find sympathy and feeling in drink. I drink so that I may suffer twice as much!" And as though in despair he laid his head down on the table.

	"Young man," he went on, raising his head again, "in your face I seem to read some trouble of mind. When you came in I read it, and that was why I addressed you at once. For in unfolding to you the story of my life, I do not wish to make myself a laughing-stock before these idle listeners, who indeed know all about it already, but I am looking for a man of feeling and education.

	Know then that my wife was educated in a high-class school for the daughters of noblemen, and on leaving she danced the shawl dance before the governor and other personages for which she was presented with a gold medal and a certificate of merit. The medal well, the medal of course was sold - long ago, but the certificate of merit is in her trunk still and not long ago she showed it to our landlady.

	And although she is most continually on bad terms with the landlady, yet she wanted to tell someone or other of her past honours and of the happy days that are gone. I don't condemn her for it, I don't blame her, for the one thing left her is recollection of the past, and all the rest is dust and ashes. Yes, yes, she is a lady of spirit, proud and determined. She scrubs the floors herself and has nothing but black bread to eat, but won't allow herself to be treated with disrespect.

	That's why she would not overlook Mr. Lebeziatnikov's rudeness to her, and so when he gave her a beating for it, she took to her bed more from the hurt to her feelings than from the blows. She was a widow when I married her, with three children, one smaller than the other. She married her first husband, an infantry officer, for love, and ran away with him from her father's house.

	She was exceedingly fond of her husband; but he gave way to cards, got into trouble and with that he died. He used to beat her at the end: and although she paid him back, of which I have authentic documentary evidence, to this day she speaks of him with tears and she throws him up to me; and I am glad, I am glad that, though only in imagination, she should think of herself as having once been happy.

	And she was left at his death with three children in a wild and remote district where I happened to be at the time; and she was left in such hopeless poverty that, although I have seen many ups and downs of all sort, I don't feel equal to describing it even. Her relations had all thrown her off. And she was proud, too, excessively proud.

	And then, honoured sir, and then, I, being at the time a widower, with a daughter of fourteen left me by my first wife, offered her my hand, for I could not bear the sight of such suffering. You can judge the extremity of her calamities, that she, a woman of education and culture and distinguished family, should have consented to be my wife. But she did!

	Weeping and sobbing and wringing her hands, she married me! For she had nowhere to turn! Do you understand, sir, do you understand what it means when you have absolutely nowhere to turn?

	"No, that you don't understand yet. And for a whole year, I performed my duties conscientiously and faithfully, and did not touch this" (he tapped the jug with his finger), "for I have feelings. But even so, I could not please her; and then I lost my place too, and that through no fault of mine but through changes in the office; and then I did touch it!

	It will be a year and a half ago soon since we found ourselves at last after many wanderings and numerous calamities in this magnificent capital, adorned with innumerable monuments. Here I obtained a situation. I obtained it and I lost it again. Do you understand? This time it was through my own fault I lost it: for my weakness had come out.

	We have now part of a room at Amalia Fyodorovna Lippevechsel's; and what we live upon and what we pay our rent with, I could not say. There are a lot of people living there besides ourselves. Dirt and disorder, a perfect Bedlam hm... yes.

	And meanwhile my daughter by my first wife has grown up; and what my daughter has had to put up with from her step-mother whilst she was growing up, I won't speak of. For, though Katerina Ivanovna is full of generous feelings, she is a spirited lady, irritable and short - tempered.

	Yes. But it's no use going over that! Sonia, as you may well fancy, has had no education. I did make an effort four years ago to give her a course of geography and universal history, but as I was not very well up in those subjects myself and we had no suitable books, and what books we had, anyway we have not even those now, so all our instruction came to an end.

	We stopped at Cyrus of Persia. Since she has attained years of maturity, she has read other books of romantic tendency and of late she had read with great interest a book she got through Mr. Lebeziatnikov, Lewes' Physiology- do you know it? - and even recounted extracts from it to us: and that's the whole of her education. And now may I venture to address you, honoured sir, on my own account with a private question.

	Do you suppose that a respectable poor girl can earn much by honest work?

	Not fifteen farthings a day can she earn, if she is respectable and has no special talent and that without putting her work down for an instant! And what's more, Ivan Ivanitch Klopstock the civil counsellor - have you heard of him? - has not to this day paid her for the half-dozen linen shirts she made him and drove her roughly away, stamping and reviling her, on the pretext that the shirt collars were not made like the pattern and were put in askew.

	And there are the little ones hungry.

	And Katerina Ivanovna walking up and down and wringing her hands, her cheeks flushed red, as they always are in that disease: 'Here you live with us,' says she, 'you eat and drink and are kept warm and you do nothing to help.' And much she gets to eat and drink when there is not a crust for the little ones for three days! I was lying at the time well, what of it!

	I was lying drunk and I heard my Sonia speaking (she is a gentle creature with a soft little voice fair hair and such a pale, thin little face). She said: 'Katerina Ivanovna, am I really to do a thing like that?'

	And Darya Frantsovna, a woman of evil character and very well known to the police, had two or three times tried to get at her through the landlady.

	'And why not?' said Katerina Ivanovna with a jeer, 'you are something mighty precious to be so careful of!' But don't blame her, don't blame her, honoured sir, don't blame her! She was not herself when she spoke, but driven to distraction by her illness and the crying of the hungry children; and it was said more to wound her than anything else.

	For that's Katerina Ivanovna's character, and when children cry, even from hunger, she falls to beating them at once. At six o'clock I saw Sonia get up, put on her kerchief and her cape, and go out of the room and about nine o'clock she came back. She walked straight up to Katerina Ivanovna and she laid thirty roubles on the table before her in silence.

	She did not utter a word, she did not even look at her, she simply picked up our big green drap de dames shawl (we have a shawl, made of drap de dames) put it over her head and face and lay down on the bed with her face to the wall; only her little shoulders and her body kept shuddering.

	And I went on lying there, just as before. And then I saw, young man, I saw Katerina Ivanovna, in the same silence go up to Sonia's little bed; she was on her knees all the evening kissing Sonia's feet, and would not get up, and then they both fell asleep in each other's arms together, together yes and I lay drunk."

	Marmeladov stopped short, as though his voice had failed him. Then he hurriedly filled his glass, drank, and cleared his throat.

	"Since then, sir," he went on after a brief pause--"Since then, owing to an unfortunate occurrence and through information given by evil - intentioned persons-in all which Darya Frantsovna took a leading part on the pretext that she had been treated with want of respect - since then my daughter Sofya Semyonovna has been forced to take a yellow ticket, and owing to that she is unable to go on living with us.

	For our landlady, Amalia Fyodorovna would not hear of it (though she had backed up Darya Frantsovna before) and Mr. Lebeziatnikov too. All the trouble between him and Katerina Ivanovna was on Sonia's account. At first he was for making up to Sonia himself and then all of a sudden he stood on his dignity:

	'How,' said he, 'can a highly educated man like me live in the same rooms with a girl like that?' And Katerina Ivanovna would not let it pass, she stood up for her and so that's how it happened. And Sonia comes to us now, mostly after dark; she comforts Katerina Ivanovna and gives her all she can.

	She has a room at the Kapernaumovs' the tailors, she lodges with them; Kapernaumov is a lame man with a cleft palate and all of his numerous family have cleft palates too.

	And his wife, too, has a cleft palate. They all live in one room, but Sonia has her own, partitioned off. Very poor people and all with cleft palates yes. Then I got up in the morning, and put on my rags, lifted up my hands to heaven and set off to his excellency Ivan Afanasyvitch.

	His excellency Ivan Afanasyvitch, do you know him? No? Well, then, it's a man of God you don't know. He is wax before the face of the Lord; even as wax melteth! His eyes were dim when he heard my story.

	'Marmeladov, once already you have deceived my expectations. I'll take you once more on my own responsibility that's what he said, 'remember,' he said, 'and now you can go.' I kissed the dust at his feet - in thought only, for in reality he would not have allowed me to do it, being a statesman and a man of modern political and enlightened ideas. I returned home, and when I announced that I'd been taken back into the service and should receive a salary, heavens, what a to-do there was!

	Marmeladov stopped again in violent excitement. At that moment a whole party of revellers already drunk came in from the street, and the sounds of a hired concertina and the cracked piping voice of a child of seven singing "The Hamlet" were heard in the entry. The room was filled with noise. The tavern-keeper and the boys were busy with the new-comers. Marmeladov paying no attention to the new arrivals continued his story. He appeared by now to be extremely weak, but as he became more and more drunk, he became more and more talkative. The recollection of his recent success in getting the situation seemed to revive him, and was positively reflected in a sort of radiance on his face. Raskolnikov listened attentively.

	"That was five weeks ago, sir. Yes."

	As soon as Katerina Ivanovna and Sonia heard of it, mercy on us, it was as though I stepped into the kingdom of Heaven. It used to be: you can lie like a beast, nothing but abuse. Now they were walking on tiptoe, hushing the children. 'Semyon Zaharovitch is tired with his work at the office, he is resting, shh!' They made me coffee before I went to work and boiled cream for me! They began to get real cream for me, do you hear that? And how they managed to get together the money for a decent outfit - eleven roubles, fifty copecks, I can't guess. Boots, cotton shirt- fronts- most magnificent, a uniform, they got up all in splendid style, for eleven roubles and a half. The first morning I came back from the office I found Katerina Ivanovna had cooked two courses for dinner-soup and salt meat with horse radish-which we had never dreamed of till then. She had not any dresses none at all, but she got herself up as though she were going on a visit; and not that she'd anything to do it with, she smartened herself up with nothing at all, she'd done her hair nicely, put on a clean collar of some sort, cuffs, and there she was, quite a different person, she was younger and better looking.

	Sonia, my little darling, had only helped with money 'for the time,' she said, 'it won't do for me to come and see you too often. After dark maybe when no one can see.' Do you hear, do you hear? I lay down for a nap after dinner and what do you think: though Katerina Ivanovna had quarrelled to the last degree with our landlady Amalia Fyodorovna only a week before, she could not resist then asking her in to coffee. For two hours they were sitting, whispering together. 'Semyon Zaharovitch is in the service again, now, and receiving a salary,' says she, 'and he went himself to his excellency and his excellency himself came out to him, made all the others wait and led Semyon Zaharovitch by the hand before everybody into his study.' Do you hear, do you hear? 'To be sure,' says he, 'Semyon Zaharovitch, remembering your past services,' says he, 'and in spite of your propensity to that foolish weakness, since you promise now and since moreover we've got on badly without you,' (do you hear, do you hear;) 'and so,' says he, 'I rely now on your word as a gentleman.' And all that, let me tell you, she has simply made up for herself, and not simply out of wantonness, for the sake of bragging; no, she believes it all herself, she amuses herself with her own fancies, upon my word she does! And I don't blame her for it, no, I don't blame her!

	Six days ago when I brought her my first earnings in full - twenty - three roubles forty copecks altogether-she called me her poppet: 'poppet,' said she, 'my little poppet.' And when we were by ourselves, you understand? You would not think me a beauty, you would not think much of me as a husband, would you? Well, she pinched my cheek, 'my little poppet,' said she."

	Marmeladov broke off, tried to smile, but suddenly his chin began to twitch. He controlled himself however. The tavern, the degraded appearance of the man, the five nights in the hay barge, and the pot of spirits, and yet this poignant love for his wife and children bewildered his listener. Raskolnikov listened intently but with a sick sensation. He felt vexed that he had come here.

	"Honoured sir, honoured sir," cried Marmeladov recovering himself- "Oh, sir, perhaps all this seems a laughing matter to you, as it does to others, and perhaps I am only worrying you with the stupidity of all the trivial details of my home life, but it is not a laughing matter to me. For I can feel it all. And the whole of that heavenly day of my life and the whole of that evening I passed in fleeting dreams of how I would arrange it all, and how I would dress all the children, and how I should give her rest, and how I should rescue my own daughter from dishonour and restore her to the bosom of her family

	And a great deal more. Quite excusable, sir. Well, then, sir" (Marmeladov suddenly gave a sort of start, raised his head and gazed intently at his listener) "well, on the very next day after all those dreams, that is to say, exactly five days ago, in the evening, by a cunning trick, like a thief in the night, I stole from Katerina Ivanovna the key of her box, took out what was left of my earnings, how much it was I have forgotten, and now look at me, all of you! It's the fifth day since I left home, and they are looking for me there and it's the end of my employment, and my uniform is lying in a tavern on the Egyptian bridge. I exchanged it for the garments I have on and it's the end of everything!"

	Marmeladov struck his forehead with his fist, clenched his teeth, closed his eyes and leaned heavily with his elbow on the table. But a minute later his face suddenly changed and with a certain assumed slyness and affectation of bravado, he glanced at Raskolnikov, laughed and said:

	"This morning I went to see Sonia, I went to ask her for a pick-me-up! He-he-he!"

	"You don't say she gave it to you?" cried one of the new-comers; he shouted the words and went off into a guffaw.

	"This very quart was bought with her money," Marmeladov declared, addressing himself exclusively to Raskolnikov. "Thirty copecks she gave me with her own hands, her last, all she had, as I saw. She said nothing, she only looked at me without a word. Not on earth, but up yonder they grieve over men, they weep, but they don't blame them, they don't blame them! But it hurts more, it hurts more when they don't blame! Thirty copecks yes! And maybe she needs them now, eh? What do you think, my dear sir? For now she's got to keep up her appearance. It costs money, that smartness, that special smartness, you know? Do you understand? And there's pomatum, too, you see, she must have things; petticoats, starched ones, shoes, too, real jaunty ones to show off her foot when she has to step over a puddle. Do you understand, sir, do you understand what all that smartness means? And here I her own father, here I took thirty copecks of that money for a drink! And I am drinking it! And I have already drunk it! Come, who will have pity on a man like me, eh? Are you sorry for me, sir, or not? Tell me, sir, are you sorry or not? He-he-he!"

	He would have filled his glass, but there was no drink left. The pot was empty.

	"What are you to be pitied for?" shouted the tavern-keeper who was again near them.

	Shouts of laughter and even oaths followed. The laughter and the oaths came from those who were listening and also from those who had heard nothing but were simply looking at the figure of the discharged government clerk.

	"To be pitied! Why am I to be pitied?" Marmeladov suddenly declaimed, standing up with his arm outstretched, as though he had been only waiting for that question.

	"Why am I to be pitied, you say? Yes, there's nothing to pity me for! I ought to be crucified, crucified on a cross, not pitied! Crucify me, oh judge, crucify me but pity me! And then I will go of myself to be crucified, for it's not merry-making I seek but tears and tribulation! Do you suppose, you that sell, that this pint of yours has been sweet to me? It was tribulation I sought at the bottom of it, tears and tribulation, and have found it, and I have tasted it; but He will pity us Who has had pity on all men, Who has understood all men and all things, He is the One, He too is the judge. He will come in that day and He will ask: 'Where is the daughter who gave herself for her cross, consumptive stepmother and for the little children of another? Where is the daughter who had pity upon the filthy drunkard, her earthly father, undismayed by his beastliness?' And He will say, 'Come to me! I have already forgiven thee once. I have forgiven thee once. Thy sins which are many are forgiven thee for thou hast loved much.' And he will forgive my Sonia, He will forgive, I know it. I felt it in my heart when I was with her just now! And He will judge and will forgive all, the good and the evil, the wise and the meek. And when He has done with all of them, then He will summon us. 'You too come forth,' He will say, 'Come forth ye drunkards, come forth, ye weak ones, come forth, ye children of shame!' And we shall all come forth, without shame and shall stand before him. And He will say unto us, 'Ye are swine, made in the Image of the Beast and with his mark; but come ye also!' And the wise ones and those of understanding will say, 'Oh Lord, why dost Thou receive these men?' And He will say, 'This is why I receive them, oh ye wise, this is why I receive them, oh ye of understanding, that not one of them believed himself to be worthy of this.' And He will hold out His hands to us and we shall fall down before him and we shall weep and we shall understand all things! Then we shall understand all! And all will understand, Katerina Ivanovna even she will understand Lord, Thy kingdom come!" And he sank down on the bench exhausted, and helpless, looking at no one, apparently oblivious of his surroundings and plunged in deep thought. His words had created a certain impression; there was a moment of silence; but soon laughter and oaths were heard again.

	"That's his notion!"

	"Talked himself silly!"

	"A fine clerk he is!"

	And so on, and so on.

	"Let us go, sir," said Marmeladov all at once, raising his head and addressing Raskolnikov-"come along with me Kozel's house, looking into the yard. I'm going to Katerina Ivanovna-time I did."

	Raskolnikov had for some time been wanting to go and he had meant to help him. Marmeladov was much unstable on his legs than in his speech and leaned heavily on the young man. They had two or three hundred paces to go. The drunken man was more and more overcome by dismay and confusion as they drew nearer the house.

	"It's not Katerina Ivanovna I am afraid of now," he muttered in agitation-" and that she will begin pulling my hair. What does my hair matter! Bother my hair! That's what I say! Indeed it will be better if she does begin pulling it, that's not what I am afraid of it's her eyes I am afraid of yes, her eyes the red on her cheeks, too, frightens me and her breathing too. Have you noticed how people in that disease breathe when they are excited? I am frightened of the children's crying, too. For if Sonia has not taken them food. I don't know what's happened! I don't know! But blows I am not afraid of. Know, sir, that such blows are not a pain to me, but even an enjoyment. In fact I can't get on without it. It's better so Let her strike me, it relieves her heart it's better so. There is the house. The house of Kozel, the cabinet-maker a German, well-to- do. Lead the way!"

	They went in from the yard and up to the fourth storey. The staircase got darker and darker as they went up. It was nearly eleven o'clock and although in summer in Petersburg there is no real night, yet it was quite dark at the top of the stairs.

	A grimy little door at the very top of the stairs stood ajar. A very poorlooking room about ten paces long was lighted up by a candle-end; the whole of it was visible from the entrance. It was all in disorder, littered up with rags of all sorts, especially children's garments. Across the furthest corner was stretched a ragged sheet. Behind it probably was the bed. There was nothing in the room except two chairs and a sofa covered with American leather, full of holes, before which stood an old deal kitchen-table, unpainted and uncovered. At the edge of the table stood a smoldering tallow - candle in an iron candlestick. It appeared that the family had a room to themselves, not part of a room, but their room was practically a passage. The door leading to the other rooms, or rather cupboards, into which Amalia Lippevechsel's flat was divided stood half open, and there was shouting, uproar and laughter within. People seemed to be playing cards and drinking tea there. Words of the most unceremonious kind flew out from time to time.

	Raskolnikov recognised Katerina Ivanovna at once. She was a rather tall, slim and graceful woman, terribly emaciated, with magnificent dark brown hair and with a hectic flush in her cheeks. She was pacing up and down in her little room, pressing her hands against her chest; her lips were parched and her breathing came in nervous broken gasps. Her eyes glittered as in fever and looked about with a harsh immovable stare. And that consumptive and excited face with the last flickering light of the candle-end playing upon it made a sickening impression. She seemed to Raskolnikov about thirty years old and was certainly a strange wife for Marmeladov. She had not heard them and did not notice them coming in. She seemed to be lost in thought, hearing and seeing nothing. The room was close, but she had not opened the window; a stench rose from the staircase, but the door on to the stairs was not closed. From the inner rooms clouds of tobacco smoke floated in, she kept coughing, but did not close the door. The youngest child, a girl of six, was asleep, sitting curled up on the floor with her head on the sofa. A boy a year older stood crying and shaking in the corner, probably he had just had a beating. Beside him stood a girl of nine years old, tall and thin, wearing a thin and ragged chemise with an ancient cashmere pelisse flung over her bare shoulders, long outgrown and barely reaching her knees. Her arm, as thin as a stick, was round her brother's neck. She was trying to comfort him, whispering something to him, and doing all she could to keep him from whimpering again. At the same time her large dark eyes, which looked larger still from the thinness of her frightened face, were watching her mother with alarm. Marmeladov did not enter the door, but dropped on his knees in the very doorway, pushing Raskolnikov in front of him. The woman seeing a stranger stopped indifferently facing him, coming to herself for a moment and apparently wondering what he had come for. But evidently she decided that he was going into the next room, as he had to pass through hers to get there. Taking no further notice of him, she walked towards the outer door to close it and uttered a sudden scream on seeing her husband on his knees in the doorway.

	"Ah!" she cried out in a frenzy, "he has come back! The criminal! The monster! And where is the money? What's in your pocket, show me! And your clothes are all different! Where are your clothes? Where is the money! Speak!"

	And she fell to searching him. Marmeladov submissively and obediently held up both arms to facilitate the search. Not a farthing was there.

	"Where is the money?" she cried- "Mercy on us, can he have drunk it all? There were twelve silver roubles left in the chest!" and in a fury she seized him by the hair and dragged him into the room. Marmeladov seconded her efforts by meekly crawling along on his knees.

	"And this is a consolation to me! This does not hurt me, but is a positive con-so-la-tion, ho-nou-red sir," he called out, shaken to and fro by his hair and even once striking the ground with his forehead. The child asleep on the floor woke up, and began to cry. The boy in the corner losing all control began trembling and screaming and rushed to his sister in violent terror, almost in a fit. The eldest girl was shaking like a leaf.

	"He's drunk it! he's drunk it all," the poor woman screamed in despair. "And his clothes are gone! And they are hungry, hungry!" - and wringing her hands she pointed to the children. "Oh, accursed life! And you, are you not ashamed?" she pounced all at once upon Raskolnikov "from the tavern! Have you been drinking with him? You have been drinking with him, too! Go away!"

	The young man was hastening away without uttering a word. The inner door was thrown wide open and inquisitive faces were peering in at it. Coarse laughing faces with pipes and cigarettes and heads wearing caps thrust themselves in at the doorway. Further in could be seen figures in dressing gowns flung open, in costumes of unseemly scantiness, some of them with cards in their hands. They were particularly diverted, when Marmeladov, dragged about by his hair, shouted that it was a consolation to him. They even began to come into the room; at last a sinister shrill outcry was heard this came from Amalia Lippevechsel herself pushing her way amongst them and trying to restore order after her own fashion and for the hundredth time to frighten the poor woman by ordering her with coarse abuse to clear out of the room next day. As he went out, Raskolnikov had time to put his hand into his pocket, to snatch up the coppers he had received in exchange for his rouble in the tavern and to lay them unnoticed on the window. Afterwards on the stairs, he changed his mind and would have gone back.

	"What a stupid thing I've done," he thought to himself, "they have Sonia and I want it myself." But reflecting that it would be impossible to take it back now and that in any case he would not have taken it, he dismissed it with a wave of his hand and went back to his lodging. "Sonia wants pomatum too," he said as he walked along the street, and he laughed malignantly-"such smartness costs money. Hm! And maybe Sonia herself will be bankrupt today, for there is always a risk, hunting big game digging for gold then they would all be without a crust to-morrow except for my money. Hurrah for Sonia! What a mine they've dug there! And they're making the most of it! Yes, they are making the most of it! They've wept over it and grown used to it. Man grows used to everything, the scoundrel!"

	He sank into thought.

	"And what if I am wrong," he cried suddenly after a moment's thought. "What if man is not really a scoundrel, man in general, I mean, the whole race of mankind - then all the rest is prejudice, simply artificial terrors and there are no barriers and it's all as it should be."

	He waked up late next day after a broken sleep. But his sleep had not refreshed him; he waked up bilious, irritable, ill-tempered, and looked with hatred at his room. It was a tiny cupboard of a room about six paces in length. It had a poverty-stricken appearance with its dusty yellow paper peeling off the walls, and it was so low- pitched that a man of more than average height was ill at ease in it and felt every moment that he would knock his head against the ceiling. The furniture was in keeping with the room: there were three old chairs, rather rickety; a painted table in the corner on which lay a few manuscripts and books; the dust that lay thick upon them showed that they had been long untouched. A big clumsy sofa occupied almost the whole of one wall and half the floor space of the room; it was once covered with chintz, but was now in rags and served Raskolnikov as a bed. Often he went to sleep on it, as he was, without undressing, without sheets, wrapped in his old student's overcoat, with his head on one little pillow, under which he heaped up all the linen he had, clean and dirty, by way of a bolster. A little table stood in front of the sofa.

	It would have been difficult to sink to a lower ebb of disorder, but to Raskolnikov in his present state of mind this was positively agreeable. He had got completely away from everyone, like a tortoise in its shell, and even the sight of a servant girl who had to wait upon him and looked sometimes into his room made him writhe with nervous irritation. He was in the condition that overtakes some monomaniacs entirely concentrated upon one thing. His landlady had for the last fortnight given up sending him in meals, and he had not yet thought of expostulating with her, though he went without his dinner.

	Nastasya, the cook and only servant, was rather pleased at the lodger's mood and had entirely given up sweeping and doing his room, only once a week or so she would stray into his room with a broom. She waked him up that day.

	"Get up, why are you asleep?" she called to him. "It's past nine, I have brought you some tea; will you have a cup? I should think you're fairly starving?"

	Raskolnikov opened his eyes, started and recognised Nastasya.

	"From the landlady, eh?" he asked, slowly and with a sickly face sitting up on the sofa.

	"From the landlady, indeed!"

	She set before him her own cracked teapot full of weak and stale tea and laid two yellow lumps of sugar by the side of it.

	"Here, Nastasya, take it please," he said, fumbling in his pocket (for he had slept in his clothes) and taking out a handful of coppers--"run and buy me a loaf. And get me a little sausage, the cheapest, at the pork-butcher's."

	"The loaf I'll fetch you this very minute, but wouldn't you rather have some cabbage soup instead of sausage? It's capital soup, yesterday's. I saved it for you yesterday, but you came in late. It's fine soup."

	When the soup had been brought, and he had begun upon it, Nastasya sat down beside him on the sofa and began chatting. She was a country peasant- woman and a very talkative one.

	"Praskovya Pavlovna means to complain to the police about you," she said.

	He scowled.

	"To the police? What does she want?"

	"You don't pay her money and you won't turn out of the room. That's what she wants, to be sure."

	"The devil, that's the last straw," he muttered, grinding his teeth, "no, that would not suit me just now. She is a fool," he added aloud. "I'll go and talk to her to-day."

	"Fool she is and no mistake, just as I am. But why, if you are so clever, do you lie here like a sack and have nothing to show for it? One time you used to go out, you say, to teach children. But why is it you do nothing now?"

	"I am doing." Raskolnikov began sullenly and reluctantly.

	"What are you doing?"

	"Work."

	"What sort of work?"

	"I am thinking," he answered seriously after a pause.

	Nastasya was overcome with a fit of laughter. She was given to laughter and when anything amused her, she laughed inaudibly, quivering and shaking all over till she felt ill.

	"And have you made much money by your thinking?" she managed to articulate at last.

	"One can't go out to give lessons without boots. And I'm sick of it."

	"Don't quarrel with your bread and butter."

	"They pay so little for lessons. What's the use of a few coppers?" he answered, reluctantly, as though replying to his own thought.

	"And you want to get a fortune all at once?"

	He looked at her strangely.

	"Yes, I want a fortune," he answered firmly, after a brief pause.

	"Don't be in such a hurry, you quite frighten me! Shall I get you the loaf or not?"

	"As you please."

	"Ah, I forgot! A letter came for you yesterday when you were out."

	"A letter? For me! From whom?"

	"I can't say. I gave three copecks of my own to the postman for it. Will you pay me back?"

	"Then bring it to me, for God's sake, bring it," cried Raskolnikov greatly excited, "good God!"

	A minute later the letter was brought him. That was it: from his mother, from the province of R. He turned pale when he took it. It was a long while since he had received a letter, but another feeling also suddenly stabbed his heart.

	"Nastasya, leave me alone, for goodness' sake; here are your three copecks, but for goodness' sake, make haste and go!"

	The letter was quivering in his hand; he did not want to open it in her presence; he wanted to be left alone with this letter. When Nastasya had gone out, he lifted it quickly to his lips and kissed it; then he gazed intently at the address, the small, sloping handwriting, so dear and familiar, of the mother who had once taught him to read and write. He delayed; he seemed almost afraid of something. At last he opened it; it was a thick heavy letter, weighing over two ounces, two large sheets of note paper were covered with very small handwriting.

	"My dear Rodya," wrote his mother-"it's two months since I last had a talk with you by letter which has distressed me and even kept me awake at night, thinking. But I am sure you will not blame me for my inevitable silence. You know how I love you; you are all we have to look to, Dounia and I, you are our all, our one hope, our one stay. What a grief it was to me when I heard that you had given up the university some months ago, for want of means to keep yourself and that you had lost your lessons and your other work! How could I help you out of my hundred and twenty roubles a year pension? The fifteen roubles I sent you four months ago I borrowed, as you know, on security of my pension, from Vassily Ivanovitch Vahrushin a merchant of this town. He is a kind-hearted man and was a friend of your father's too. But having given him the right to receive the pension, I had to wait till the debt was paid off and that is only just done, so that I've been unable to send you anything all this time. But now, thank God, I believe I shall be able to send you something more and in fact we may congratulate ourselves on our good fortune now, of which I hasten to inform you. In the first place, would you have guessed, dear Rodya, that your sister has been living with me for the last six weeks and we shall not be separated in the future. Thank God, her sufferings are over, but I will tell you everything in order, so that you may know just how everything has happened and all that we have hitherto concealed from you. When you wrote to me two months ago that you had heard that Dounia had a great deal to put up with in the Svidrigrailovs' house, when you wrote that and asked me to tell you all about it-what could I write in answer to you? If I had written the whole truth to you, I dare say you would have thrown up everything and have come to us, even if you had to walk all the way, for I know your character and your feelings, and you would not let your sister be insulted. I was in despair myself, but what could I do? And, besides, I did not know the whole truth myself then. What made it all so difficult was that Dounia received a hundred roubles in advance when she took the place as governess in their family, on condition of part of her salary being deducted every month, and so it was impossible to throw up the situation without repaying the debt. This sum (now I can explain it all to you, my precious Rodya) she took chiefly in order to send you sixty roubles, which you needed so terribly then and which you received from us last year. We deceived you then, writing that this money came from Dounia's savings, but that was not so, and now I tell you all about it, because, thank God, things have suddenly changed for the better, and that you may know how Dounia loves you and what a heart she has. At first indeed Mr. Svidrigailov treated her very rudely and used to make disrespectful and jeering remarks at table. But I don't want to go into all those painful details, so as not to worry you for nothing when it is now all over. In short, in spite of the kind and generous behaviour of Marfa Petrovna, Mr. Svidrigailov's wife, and all the rest of the household, Dounia had a very hard time, especially when Mr. Svidrigailov, relapsing into his old regimental habits, was under the influence of Bacchus. And how do you think it was all explained later on? Would you believe that the crazy fellow had conceived a passion for Dounia from the beginning, but had concealed it under a show of rudeness and contempt. Possibly he was ashamed and horrified himself at his own flighty hopes, considering his years and his being the father of a family; and that made him angry with Dounia. And possibly, too, he hoped by his rude and sneering behaviour to hide the truth from others. But at last he lost all control and had the face to make Dounia an open and shameful proposal, promising her all sorts of inducements and offering, besides, to throw up everything and take her to another estate of his, or even abroad. You can imagine all she went through! To leave her situation at once was impossible not only on account of the money debt, but also to spare the feelings of Marfa Petrovna, whose suspicions would have been aroused: and then Dounia would have been the cause of a rupture in the family. And it would have meant a terrible scandal for Dounia too; that would have been inevitable. There were various other reasons owing to which Dounia could not hope to escape from that awful house for another six weeks. You know Dounia, of course; you know how clever she is and what a strong will she has. Dounia can endure a great deal and even in the most difficult cases she has the fortitude to maintain her firmness. She did not even write to me about everything for fear of upsetting me, although we were constantly in communication. It all ended very unexpectedly. Marfa Petrovna accidentally overheard her husband imploring Dounia in the garden, and, putting quite a wrong interpretation on the position, threw the blame upon her, believing her to be the cause of it all. An awful scene took place between them on the spot in the garden; Marfa Petrovna went so far as to strike Dounia, refused to hear anything and was shouting at her for a whole hour and then gave orders that Dounia should be packed off at once to me in a plain peasant's cart, into which they flung all her things, her linen and her clothes, all pell-mell, without folding it up and packing it. And a heavy shower of rain came on, too, and Dounia, insulted and put to shame, had to drive with a peasant in an open cart all the seventeen versts into town. Only think now what answer could I have sent to the letter I received from you two months ago and what could I have written? I was in despair; I dared not write to you the truth because you would have been very unhappy, mortified and indignant, and yet what could you do? You could only perhaps ruin yourself, and, besides, Dounia would not allow it; and fill up my letter with trifles when my heart was so full of sorrow, I could not. For a whole month the town was full of gossip about this scandal, and it came to such a pass that Dounia and I dared not even go to church on account of the contemptuous looks, whispers, and even remarks made aloud about us. All our acquaintances avoided us, nobody even bowed to us in the street, and I learnt that some shopmen and clerks were intending to insult us in a shameful way, smearing the gates of our house with pitch, so that the landlord began to tell us we must leave. All this was set going by Marfa Petrovna who managed to slander Dounia and throw dirt at her in every family. She knows everyone in the neighbourhood, and that month she was continually coming into the town, and as she is rather talkative and fond of gossiping about her family affairs and particularly of complaining to all and each of her husband - which is not at all right-so in a short time she had spread her story not only in the town, but over the whole surrounding district. It made me ill, but Dounia bore it better than I did, and if only you could have seen how she endured it all and tried to comfort me and cheer me up! She is an angel! But by God's mercy, our sufferings were cut short: Mr.

	Svidrigailov returned to his senses and repented and, probably feeling sorry for Dounia, he laid before Marfa Petrovna a complete and unmistakable proof of Dounia's innocence, in the form of a letter Dounia had been forced to write and give to him, before Marfa Petrovna came upon them in the garden. This letter, which remained in Mr. Svidrigailov's hands after her departure, she had written to refuse personal explanations and secret interviews, for which he was entreating her. In that letter she reproached him with great heat and indignation for the baseness of his behaviour in regard to Marfa Petrovna, reminding him that he was the father and head of a family and telling him how infamous it was of him to torment and make unhappy a defenceless girl, unhappy enough already. Indeed, dear Rodya, the letter was so nobly and touchingly written that I sobbed when I read it and to this day I cannot read it without tears. Moreover, the evidence of the servants, too, cleared Dounia's reputation; they had seen and known a great deal more than Mr. Svidrigailov had himself supposed -as indeed is always the case with servants. Marfa Petrovna was completely taken aback, and 'again crushed' as she said herself to us, but she was completely convinced of Dounia's innocence. The very next day, being Sunday, she went straight to the Cathedral, knelt down and prayed with tears to Our Lady to give her strength to bear this new trial and to do her duty. Then she came straight from the Cathedral to us, told us the whole story, wept bitterly and, fully penitent, she embraced Dounia and besought her to forgive her. The same morning without any delay, she went round to all the houses in the town and everywhere, shedding tears, she asserted in the most flattering terms Dounia's innocence and the nobility of her feelings and her behavior. What was more, she showed and read to everyone the letter in Dounia's own handwriting to Mr. Svidrigailov and even allowed them to take copies of it- which I must say I think was superfluous. In this way she was busy for several days in driving about the whole town, because some people had taken offence through precedence having been given to others. And therefore they had to take turns, so that in every house she was expected before she arrived, and everyone knew that on such and such a day Marfa Petrovna would be reading the letter in such and such a place and people assembled for every reading of it, even many who had heard it several times already both in their own houses and in other people's. In my opinion a great deal, a very great deal of all this was unnecessary; but that's Marfa Petrovna's character. Anyway she succeeded in completely re-establishing Dounia's reputation and the whole ignominy of this affair rested as an indelible disgrace upon her husband, as the only person to blame, so that I really began to feel sorry for him; it was really treating the crazy fellow too harshly. Dounia was at once asked to give lessons in several families, but she refused. All of a sudden everyone began to treat her with marked respect and all this did much to bring about the event by which, one may say, our whole fortunes are now transformed. You must know, dear Rodya, that Dounia has a suitor and that she has already consented to marry him. I hasten to tell you all about the matter, and though it has been arranged without asking your consent, I think you will not be aggrieved with me or with your sister on that account, for you will see that we could not wait and put off our decision till we heard from you. And you could not have judged all the facts without being on the spot. This was how it happened. He is already of the rank of a counsellor, Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin, and is distantly related to Marfa Petrovna, who has been very active in bringing the match about. It began with his expressing through her his desire to make our acquaintance. He was properly received, drank coffee with us and the very next day he sent us a letter in which he very courteously made an offer and begged for a speedy and decided answer. He is a very busy man and is in a great hurry to get to Petersburg, so that every moment is precious to him. At first, of course, we were greatly surprised, as it had all happened so quickly and unexpectedly. We thought and talked it over the whole day. He is a well-to-do man, to be depended upon, he has two posts in the government and has already made his fortune. It is true that he is forty-five years old, but he is of a fairly prepossessing appearance and might still be thought attractive by women, and he is altogether a very respectable and presentable man, only he seems a little morose and somewhat conceited. But possibly that may only be the impression he makes at first sight. And beware, dear Rodya, when he comes to Petersburg, as he shortly will do, beware of judging him too hastily and severely, as your way is, if there is anything you do not like in him at first sight. I give you this warning, although I feel sure that he will make a favourable impression upon you. Moreover, in order to understand any man one must be deliberate and careful to avoid forming prejudices and mistaken ideas, which are very difficult to correct and get over afterwards. And Pyotr Petrovitch, judging by many indications, is a thoroughly estimable man. At his first visit, indeed, he told us that he was a practical man, but still he shares, as he expressed it, many of the convictions 'of our most rising generation' and he is an opponent of all prejudices. He said a good deal more, for he seems a little conceited and likes to be listened to, but this is scarcely a vice. I, of course, understood very little of it, but Dounia explained to me that, though he is not a man of great education, he is clever and seems to be good-natured. You know your sister's character, Rodya. She is a resolute, sensible, patient and generous girl, but she has a passionate heart, as I know very well. Of course, there is no great love either on his side, or on hers, but Dounia is a clever girl and has the heart of an angel, and will make it her duty to make her husband happy who on his side will make her happiness his care. Of that we have no good reason to doubt, though it must be admitted the matter has been arranged in great haste. Besides he is a man of great prudence and he will see, to be sure, of himself, that his own happiness will be the more secure, the happier Dounia is with him. And as for some defects of character, for some habits and even certain differences of opinion -which indeed are inevitable even in the happiest marriages- Dounia has said that, as regards all that, she relies on herself, that there is nothing to be uneasy about, and that she is ready to put up with a great deal, if only their future relationship can be an honourable and straightforward one. He struck me, for instance, at first, as rather abrupt, but that may well come from his being an outspoken man, and that is no doubt how it is. For instance, at his second visit, after he had received Dounia's consent, in the course of conversation, he declared that before making Dounia's acquaintance, he had made up his mind to marry a girl of good reputation, without dowry and, above all, one who had experienced poverty, because, as he explained, a man ought not to be indebted to his wife, but that it is better for a wife to look upon her husband as her benefactor. I must add that he expressed it more nicely and politely than I have done, for I have forgotten his actual phrases and only remember the meaning. And, besides, it was obviously not said of design, but slipped out in the heat of conversation, so that he tried afterwards to correct himself and smooth it over, but all the same it did strike me as somewhat rude, and I said so afterwards to Dounia. But Dounia was vexed, and answered that 'words are not deeds,' and that, of course, is perfectly true. Dounia did not sleep all night before she made up her mind, and, thinking that I was asleep, she got out of bed and was walking up and down the room all night; at last she knelt down before the ikon and prayed long and fervently and in the morning she told me that she had decided.

	"I have mentioned already that Pyotr Petrovitch is just setting off for Petersburg, where he has a great deal of business, and he wants to open a legal bureau. He has been occupied for many years in conducting civil and commercial litigation, and only the other day he won an important case. He has to be in Petersburg because he has an important case before the Senate. So, Rodya dear, he may be of the greatest use to you, in every way indeed, and Dounia and I have agreed that from this very day you could definitely enter upon your career and might consider that your future is marked out and assured for you. Oh, if only this comes to pass! This would be such a benefit that we could only look upon it as a providential blessing. Dounia is dreaming of nothing else. We have even ventured already to drop a few words on the subject to Pyotr Petrovitch. He was cautious in his answer, and said that, of course, as he could not get on without a secretary, it would be better to be paying a salary to a relation than to a stranger, if only the former were fitted for the duties (as though there could be doubt of your being fitted!) but then he expressed doubts whether your studies at the university would leave you time for work at his office. The matter dropped for the time, but Dounia is thinking of nothing else now. She has been in a sort of fever for the last few days, and has already made a regular plan for your becoming in the end an associate and even a partner in Pyotr Petrovitch's business, which might well be, seeing that you are a student of law. I am in complete agreement with her, Rodya, and share all her plans and hopes, and think there is every probability of realising them. And in spite of Pyotr Petrovitch's evasiveness, very natural at present (since he does not know you),

	Dounia is firmly persuaded that she will gain everything by her good influence over her future husband; this she is reckoning upon. Of course we are careful not to talk of any of these more remote plans to Pyotr Petrovitch, especially of your becoming his partner. He is a practical man and might take this very coldly, it might all seem to him simply a day-dream. Nor has either Dounia or I breathed a word to him of the great hopes we have of his helping us to pay for your university studies; we have not spoken of it in the first place, because it will come to pass of itself, later on, and he will no doubt without wasting words offer to do it of himself, (as though he could refuse Dounia that) the more readily since you may by your own efforts become his right hand in the office, and receive this assistance not as a charity, but as a salary earned by your own work. Dounia wants to arrange it all like this and I quite agree with her. And we have not spoken of our plans for another reason, that is, because I particularly wanted you to feel on an equal footing when you first meet him. When Dounia spoke to him with enthusiasm about you, he answered that one could never judge of a man without seeing him close, for oneself, and that he looked forward to forming his own opinion when he makes your acquaintance. Do you know, my precious Rodya, I think that perhaps for some reasons (nothing to do with Pyotr Petrovitch though, simply for my own personal, perhaps old- womanish, fancies) I should do better to go on living by myself, apart, than with them, after the wedding. I am convinced that he will be generous and delicate enough to invite me and to urge me to remain with my daughter for the future, and if he has said nothing about it hitherto, it is simply because it has been taken for granted; but I shall refuse. I have noticed more than once in my life that husbands don't quite get on with their mothers - in - law, and I don't want to be the least bit in anyone's way, and for my own sake, too, would rather be quite independent, so long as I have a crust of bread of my own, and such children as you and Dounia. If possible, I would settle somewhere near you, for the most joyful piece of news, dear Rodya, I have kept for the end of my letter: know then, my dear boy, that we may, perhaps, be all together in a very short time and may embrace one another again after a separation of almost three years! It is settled for certain that Dounia and I are to set off for Petersburg, exactly when I don't know, but very, very soon, possibly in a week. It all depends on Pyotr Petrovitch who will let us know when he has had time to look round him in Petersburg. To suit his own arrangements he is anxious to have the ceremony as soon as possible, even before the fast of Our Lady, if it could be managed, or if that is too soon to be ready, immediately after. Oh, with what happiness I shall press you to my heart! Dounia is all excitement at the joyful thought of seeing you, she said one day in joke that she would be ready to marry Pyotr Petrovitch for that alone. She is an angel! She is not writing anything to you now, and has only told me to write that she has so much, so much to tell you that she is not going to take up her pen now, for a few lines would tell you nothing, and it would only mean upsetting herself; she bids me send you her love and innumerable kisses. But although we shall be meeting so soon, perhaps I shall send you as much money as I can in a day or two. Now that everyone has heard that Dounia is to marry Pyotr Petrovitch, my credit has suddenly improved and I know that Afanasy Ivanovitch will trust me now even to seventy-five roubles on the security of my pension, so that perhaps I shall be able to send you twenty-five or even thirty roubles. I would send you more, but I am uneasy about our travelling expenses; for though Pyotr Petrovitch has been so kind as to undertake part of the expenses of the journey, that is to say, he has taken upon himself the conveyance of our bags and big trunk (which will be conveyed through some acquaintances of his), we must reckon upon some expense on our arrival in Petersburg, where we can't be left without a halfpenny, at least for the first few days. But we have calculated it all, Dounia and I, to the last penny, and we see that the journey will not cost very much. It is only ninety versts from us to the railway and we have come to an agreement with a driver we know, so as to be in readiness; and from there Dounia and I can travel quite comfortably third class. So that I may very likely be able to send to you not twenty-five, but thirty roubles. But enough; I have covered two sheets already and there is no space left for more; our whole history, but so many events have happened! And now, my precious Rodya, I embrace you and send you a mother's blessing till we meet. Love Dounia your sister, Rodya; love her as she loves you and understand that she loves you beyond everything, more than herself. She is an angel and you, Rodya, you are everything to us - our one hope, our one consolation. If only you are happy, we shall be happy. Do you still say your prayers, Rodya, and believe in the mercy of our Creator and our Redeemer? I am afraid in my heart that you may have been visited by the new spirit of infidelity that is abroad to-day; If it is so, I pray for you. Remember, dear boy, how in your childhood, when your father was living, you used to lisp your prayers at my knee, and how happy we all were in those days. Goodbye, till we meet then - I embrace you warmly, warmly, with many kisses.

	Almost from the first, while he read the letter, Raskolnikov's face was wet with tears; but when he finished it, his face was pale and distorted and a bitter, wrathful and malignant smile was on his lips. He laid his head down on his threadbare dirty pillow and pondered, pondered a long time. His heart was beating violently, and his brain was in a turmoil. At last he felt cramped and stifled in the little yellow room that was like a cupboard or a box. His eyes and his mind craved for space. He took up his hat and went out, this time without dread of meeting anyone; he had forgotten his dread. He turned in the direction of the Vassilyevsky Ostrov, walking along Vassilyevsky Prospect, as though hastening on some business, but he walked, as his habit was, without noticing his way, muttering and even speaking aloud to himself, to the astonishment of the passers-by. Many of them took him to be drunk. "No, mother, no, Dounia, you won't deceive me! And then they apologise for not asking my advice and for taking the decision without me! I dare say! They imagine it is arranged now and can't be broken off; but we will see whether it can or not! A magnificent excuse: 'Pyotr Petrovitch is such a busy man that even his wedding has to be in post-haste, almost by express.' No, Dounia, I see it all and I know what you want to say to me; and I know too what you were thinking about, when you walked up and down all night, and what your prayers were like before the Holy Mother of Kazan who stands in mother's bedroom. Bitter is the ascent to Golgotha. Hm... so it is finally settled; you have determined to marry a sensible business man, Avdotya Romanovna, one who has a fortune (has already made his fortune, that is so much more solid and impressive) a man who holds two government posts and who shares the ideas of our most rising generation, as mother writes, and who 'seems' to be kind, as Dounia herself observes. That 'seems' beats everything! And that very Dounia for that very 'seems' is marrying him! Splendid! Splendid!

	"But I should like to know why mother has written to me about 'our most rising generation'? Simply as a descriptive touch, or with the idea of prepossessing me in favour of Mr. Luzhin? Oh, the cunning of them! I should like to know one thing more: how far they were open with one another that day and night and all this time since? Was it all put into 'words', or did both understand that they had the same thing at heart and in their minds, so that there was no need to speak of it aloud, and better not to speak of it. Most likely it was partly like that, from mother's letter it's evident: he struck her as rude 'a little', and mother in her simplicity took her observations to Dounia. And she was sure to be vexed and 'answered her angrily.' I should think so! Who would not be angered when it was quite clear without any naive questions and when it was understood that it was useless to discuss it. And why does she write to me, 'love Dounia, Rodya, and she loves you more than herself'? Has she a secret conscience-prick at sacrificing her daughter to her son? 'You are our one comfort, you are everything to us.' Oh, mother!"

	His bitterness grew more and more intense, and if he had happened to meet Mr. Luzhin at the moment, he might have murdered him.

	"Hm... yes, that's true," he continued, pursuing the whirling ideas that chased each other in his brain, "it is true that 'it needs time and care to get to know a man,' but there is no mistake about Mr. Luzhin. The chief thing is he is 'a man of business and seems kind,' that was something, wasn't it, to send the bags and big box for them! A kind man, no doubt after that! But his bride and her mother are to drive in a peasant's cart covered with sacking (I know, I have been driven in it). No matter! It is only ninety versts and then they can 'travel very comfortably, third class,' for a thousand versts! Quite right, too. One must cut one's coat according to one's cloth, but what about you, Mr. Luzhin? She is your bride. And you must be aware that her mother has to raise money on her pension for the journey. To be sure it's a matter of business, a partnership for mutual benefit, with equal shares and expenses; - food and drink provided, but pay for your tobacco. The business man has got the better of them, too. The luggage will cost less than their fares and very likely go for nothing. How is it that they don't both see all that, or is it that they don't want to see? And they are pleased, pleased! And to think that this is only the first blossoming, and that the real fruits are to come! But what really matters is not the stinginess, is not the meanness, but the tone of the whole thing. For that will be the tone after marriage, it's a foretaste of it. And mother too, why should she be so lavish? What will she have by the time she gets to Petersburg? Three silver roubles or two 'paper ones' as she says that old woman him. What does she expect to live upon in Petersburg afterwards? She has her reasons already for guessing that she could not live with Dounia after the marriage, even for the first few months. The good man has no doubt let slip something on that subject also, though mother would deny it: 'I shall refuse,' says she. On whom is she reckoning then? Is she counting on what is left of her hundred and twenty roubles of pension when Afanasy Ivanovitch's debt is paid? She knits woollen shawls and embroiders cuffs, ruining her old eyes. And all her shawls don't add more than twenty roubles a year to her hundred and twenty, I know that. So she is building all her hopes all the time on Mr. Luzhin's generosity; 'he will offer it of himself, he will press it on me.' You may wait a long time for that! That's how it always is with these Schilleresque noble hearts; till the last moment every goose is a swan with them, till the last moment, they hope for the best and will see nothing wrong, and although they have an inkling of the other side of the picture, yet they won't face the truth till they are forced to; the very thought of it makes them shiver; they thrust the truth away with both hands, until the man they deck out in false colours puts a fool's cap on them with his own hands. I should like to know whether Mr. Luzhin has any orders of merit; I bet he has the Anna in his buttonhole and that he puts it on when he goes to dine with contractors or merchants. He will be sure to have it for his wedding, too! Enough of him, confound him!

	"Well, mother I don't wonder at, it's like her, God bless her, but how could Dounia? Dounia darling, as though I did not know you! You were nearly twenty when I saw you last: I understood you then. Mother writes that 'Dounia can put up with a great deal.' I know that very well. I knew that two years and a half ago, and for the last two and a half years I have been thinking about it, thinking of just that, that 'Dounia can put up with a great deal.' If she could put up with Mr. Svidrigailov and all the rest of it, she certainly can put up with a great deal. And now mother and she have taken it into their heads that she can put up with Mr. Luzhin, who propounds the theory of the superiority of wives raised from destitution and owing everything to their husband's bounty-who propounds it, too, almost at the first interview. Granted that he 'let it slip,' though he is a sensible man, (yet maybe it was not a slip at all, but he meant to make himself clear as soon as possible) but Dounia, Dounia? She understands the man, of course, but she will have to live with the man. Why! she'd live on black bread and water, she would not sell her soul, she would not barter her moral freedom for comfort; she would not barter it for all Schleswig-Holstein, much less Mr. Luzhin's money. No, Dounia was not that sort when I knew her and she is still the same, of course! Yes, there's no denying, the Svidrigailovs are a bitter pill! It's a bitter thing to spend one's life a governess in the provinces for two hundred roubles, but I know she would rather be a nigger on a plantation or a Lett with a German master than degrade her soul, and her moral dignity, by binding herself for ever to a man whom she does not respect and with whom she has nothing in common - for her own advantage. And if Mr. Luzhin had been of unalloyed gold, or one huge diamond, she would never have consented to become his legal concubine. Why is she consenting then? What's the point of it? What's the answer? It's clear enough: for herself, for her comfort, to save her life she would not sell herself, but for someone else she is doing it! For one she loves, for one she adores, she will sell herself! That's what it all amounts to; for her brother, for her mother, she will sell herself! She will sell everything! In such cases, 'we overcome our moral feeling if necessary,' freedom, peace, conscience even, all, all are brought into the market. Let my life go, if only my dear ones may be happy! More than that, we become casuists, we learn to be Jesuitical and for a time maybe we can soothe ourselves, we can persuade ourselves that it is one's duty for a good object. That's just like us, it's as clear as daylight. It's clear that Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov is the central figure in the business, and no one else. Oh, yes, she can ensure his happiness, keep him in the university, make him a partner in the office, make his whole future secure; perhaps he may even be a rich man later on, prosperous, respected, and may even end his life a famous man! But my mother? It's all Rodya, precious Rodya, her first born! For such a son who would not sacrifice such a daughter! Oh, loving, over-partial hearts! Why, for his sake we would not shrink even from Sonia's fate. Sonia, Sonia Marmeladov, the eternal victim so long as the world lasts. Have you taken the measure of your sacrifice, both of you? Is it right? Can you bear it? Is it any use? Is there sense in it? And let me tell you, Dounia, Sonia's life is no worse than life with Mr. Luzhin. 'There can be no question of love,' mother writes. And what if there can be no respect either, if on the contrary there is aversion, contempt, repulsion, what then? So you will have to 'keep up your appearance,' too. Is not that so? Do you understand what that smartness means? Do you understand that the Luzhin smartness is just the same thing as Sonia's and may be worse, viler, baser, because in your case, Dounia, it's a bargain for luxuries, after all, but with Sonia it's simply a question of starvation. It has to be paid for, it has to be paid for, Dounia, this smartness. And what if it's more than you can bear afterwards, if you regret it? The bitterness, the misery, the curses, the tears hidden from all the world, for you are not a Marfa Petrovna. And how will your mother feel then? Even now she is uneasy, she is worried, but then, when she sees it all clearly? And I? Yes, indeed, what have you taken me for? I won't have your sacrifice, Dounia, I won't have it, mother! It shall not be, so long as I am alive, it shall not, it shall not! I won't accept it!"

	He suddenly paused in his reflection and stood still.

	"It shall not be? But what are you going to do to prevent it? You'll forbid it? And what right have you? What can you promise them on your side to give you such a right? Your whole life, your whole future, you will devote to them when you have finished your studies and obtained a post? Yes, we have heard all that before, and that's all words, but now? Now something must be done, now, do you understand that? And what are you doing now? You are living upon them. They borrow on their hundred roubles pension. They borrow from the Svidrigailovs. How are you going to save them from Svidrigailovs, from Afanasy Ivanovitch Vahrushin, oh, future millionaire Zeus who would arrange their lives for them? In another ten years? In another ten years, mother will be blind with knitting shawls, maybe with weeping too. She will be worn to a shadow with fasting and my sister? Imagine for a moment what may have become of your sister in ten years? What may happen to her during those ten years? Can you fancy?"

	So he tortured himself, fretting himself with such questions, and finding a kind of enjoyment in it. And yet all these questions were not new ones suddenly confronting him, they were old familiar aches. It was long since they had first begun to grip and rend his heart. Long, long ago his present anguish had its first beginnings; it had waxed and gathered strength, it had matured and concentrated, until it had taken the form of a fearful, frenzied and fantastic question, which tortured his heart and mind, clamouring insistently for an answer. Now his mother's letter had burst on him like a thunderclap. It was clear that he must not now suffer passively, worrying himself over unsolved questions, but that he must do something, do it at once, and do it quickly. Anyway he must decide on something, or else.

	"Or throw up life altogether!" he cried suddenly, in a frenzy - accept one's lot humbly as it is, once for all and stifle everything in oneself, giving up all claim to activity, life and love!"

	"Do you understand, sir, do you understand what it means when you have absolutely nowhere to turn?" Marmeladov's question came suddenly into his mind, "for every man must have somewhere to turn."

	He gave a sudden start; another thought, that he had had yesterday, slipped back into his mind. But he did not start at the thought recurring to him, for he knew, he had felt beforehand, that it must come back, he was expecting it; besides it was not only yesterday's thought. The difference was that a month ago, yesterday even, the thought was a mere dream: but now... now it appeared not a dream at all, it had taken a new menacing and quite unfamiliar shape, and he suddenly became aware of this himself. He felt a hammering in his head, and there was a darkness before his eyes.

	He looked round hurriedly, he was searching for something. He wanted to sit down and was looking for a seat; he was walking along the K Boulevard. There was a seat about a hundred paces in front of him. He walked towards it as fast he could; but on the way he met with a little adventure which absorbed all his attention.

	Looking for the seat, he had noticed a woman walking some twenty paces in front of him, but at first he took no more notice of her than of other objects that crossed his path. It had happened to him many times going home not to notice the road by which he was going, and he was accustomed to walk like that. But there was at first sight something so strange about the woman in front of him, that gradually his attention was riveted upon her, at first reluctantly and, as it were, resentfully, and then more and more intently. He felt a sudden desire to find out what it was that was so strange about the woman. In the first place, she appeared to be a girl quite young, and she was walking in the great heat bareheaded and with no parasol or gloves, waving her arms about in an absurd way. She had on a dress of some light silky material, but put on strangely awry, not properly hooked up, and torn open at the top of the skirt, close to the waist: a great piece was rent and hanging loose. A little kerchief was flung about her bare throat, but lay slanting on one side. The girl was walking unsteadily, too, stumbling and staggering from side to side. She drew Raskolnikov's whole attention at last. He overtook the girl at the seat, but, on reaching it, she dropped down on it, in the corner; she let her head sink on the back of the seat and closed her eyes, apparently in extreme exhaustion. Looking at her closely, he saw at once that she was completely drunk. It was a strange and shocking sight. He could hardly believe that he was not mistaken. He saw before him the face of a quite young, fair-haired girl-sixteen, perhaps not more than fifteen, years old, pretty little face, but flushed and heavy looking and, as it were, swollen. The girl seemed hardly to know what she was doing; she crossed one leg over the other, lifting it indecorously, and showed every sign of being unconscious that she was in the street.

	Raskolnikov did not sit down, but he felt unwilling to leave her, and stood facing her in perplexity. This boulevard was never much frequented; and now, at two o'clock, in the stifling heat, it was quite deserted. And yet on the further side of the boulevard, about fifteen paces away, a gentleman was standing on the edge of the pavement. He, too, would apparently have liked to approach the girl with some object of his own. He, too, had probably seen her in the distance and had followed her, but found Raskolnikov in his way. He looked angrily at him, though he tried to escape his notice, and stood impatiently biding his time, till the unwelcome man in rags should have moved away. His intentions were unmistakable. The gentleman was a plump, thickly-set man, about thirty, fashionably dressed, with a high colour, red lips and moustaches. Raskolnikov felt furious; he had a sudden longing to insult this fat dandy in some way. He left the girl for a moment and walked towards the gentleman.

	"Hey! You Svidrigailov! What do you want here?" he shouted, clenching his fists and laughing, spluttering with rage.

	"What do you mean?" the gentleman asked sternly, scowling in haughty astonishment.

	"Get away, that's what I mean."

	"How dare you, you low fellow!"

	He raised his cane. Raskolnikov rushed at him with his fists, without reflecting that the stout gentleman was a match for two men like himself. But at that instant someone seized him from behind, and a police constable stood between them.

	"That's enough, gentlemen, no fighting, please, in a public place. What do you want? Who are you?" he asked Raskolnikov sternly, noticing his rags.

	Raskolnikov looked at him intently. He had a straight-forward, sensible, soldierly face, with grey moustaches and whiskers.

	"You are just the man I want," Raskolnikov cried, catching at his arm. "I am a student, Raskolnikov. You may as well know that too," he added, addressing the gentleman, "come along, I have something to show you."

	And taking the policeman by the hand he drew him towards the seat.

	"Look here, hopelessly drunk, and she has just come down the boulevard. There is no telling who and what she is, she does not look like a professional. It's more likely she has been given drink and deceived somewhere for the first time you understand? And they've put her out into the street like that. Look at the way her dress is torn, and the way it has been put on: she has been dressed by somebody, she has not dressed herself, and dressed by unpractised hands, by a man's hands; that's evident. And now look there: I don't know that dandy with whom I was going to fight, I see him for the first time, but he, too, has seen her on the road, just now, drunk, not knowing what she is doing, and now he is very eager to get hold of her, to get her away somewhere while she is in this state that's certain, believe me, I am not wrong. I saw him myself watching her and following her, but I prevented him, and he is just waiting for me to go away. Now he has walked away a little, and is standing still, pretending to make a cigarette. Think how can we keep her out of his hands, and how are we to get her home?"

	The policeman saw it all in a flash. The stout gentleman was easy to understand, he turned to consider the girl. The policeman bent over to examine her more closely, and his face worked with genuine compassion.

	"Ah, what a pity!" he said, shaking his head "why, she is quite a child! She has been deceived, you can see that at once. Listen, lady," he began addressing her, "where do you live?" The girl opened her weary and sleepy-looking eyes, gazed blankly at the speaker and waved her hand.

	"Here," said Raskolnikov feeling in his pocket and finding twenty copecks, "here, call a cab and tell him to drive her to her address. The only thing is to find out her address!"

	"Missy, missy!" the policeman began again, taking the money. "I'll fetch you a cab and take you home myself. Where shall I take you, eh? Where do you live?"

	"Go away! They won't let me alone," the girl muttered, and once more waved her hand.

	"Ah, ah, how shocking! It's shameful, missy, it's a shame!" He shook his head again, shocked, sympathetic and indignant.

	"It's a difficult job," the policeman said to Raskolnikov, and as he did so, he looked him up and down in a rapid glance. He, too, must have seemed a strange figure to him: dressed in rags and handing him money!

	"Did you meet her far from here?" he asked him.

	"I tell you she was walking in front of me, staggering, just here, in the boulevard. She only just reached the seat and sank down on it."

	"Ah, the shameful things that are done in the world nowadays, God have mercy on us! An innocent creature like that, drunk already! She has been deceived, that's a sure thing. See how her dress has been torn too. Ah, the vice one sees nowadays! And as likely as not she belongs to gentlefolk too, poor ones maybe. There are many like that nowadays. She looks refined, too, as though she were a lady," and he bent over her once more.

	Perhaps he had daughters growing up like that, "looking like ladies and refined" with pretensions to gentility and smartness.

	"The chief thing is," Raskolnikov persisted, "to keep her out of this scoundrel's hands! Why should he outrage her! It's as clear as day what he is after; ah, the brute, he is not moving off!"

	Raskolnikov spoke aloud and pointed to him. The gentleman heard him, and seemed about to fly into a rage again, but thought better of it, and confined himself to a contemptuous look. He then walked slowly another ten paces away and again halted.

	"Keep her out of his hands we can," said the constable thoughtfully, "if only she'd tell us where to take her, but as it is. Missy, hey, missy!" he bent over her once more.

	She opened her eyes fully all of a sudden, looked at him intently, as though realising something, got up from the seat and walked away in the direction from which she had come. "Oh shameful wretches, they won't let me alone!" she said, waving her hand again. She walked quickly, though staggering as before. The dandy followed her, but along another avenue, keeping his eye on her.

	"Don't be anxious, I won't let him have her," the policeman said resolutely, and he set off after them.

	"Ah, the vice one sees nowadays!" he repeated aloud, sighing.

	At that moment something seemed to sting Raskolnikov; in an instant a complete revulsion of feeling came over him.

	"Hey, here!" he shouted after the policeman.

	The latter turned round.

	"Let them be! What is it to do with you? Let her go! Let him amuse himself." He pointed at the dandy, "What is it to do with you?"

	The policeman was bewildered, and stared at him open-eyed. Raskolnikov laughed.

	"Well!" ejaculated the policeman, with a gesture of contempt, and he walked after the dandy and the girl, probably taking Raskolnikov for a madman or something even worse.

	"He has carried off my twenty copecks," Raskolnikov murmured angrily when he was left alone. "Well, let him take as much from the other fellow to allow him to have the girl and so let it end. And why did I want to interfere? Is it for me to help? Have I any right to help? Let them devour each other alive-what is to me? How did I dare to give him twenty copecks? Were they mine?"

	In spite of those strange words he felt very wretched. He sat down on the deserted seat. His thoughts strayed aimlessly. He found it hard to fix his mind on anything at that moment. He longed to forget himself altogether, to forget everything, and then to wake up and begin life anew.

	"Poor girl!" he said, looking at the empty corner where she had sat- "She will come to herself and weep, and then her mother will find out. She will give her a beating, a horrible, shameful beating and then maybe, turn her out of doors. And even if she does not, the Darya Frantsovnas will get wind of it, and the girl will soon be slipping out on the sly here and there. Then there will be the hospital directly (that's always the luck of those girls with respectable mothers, who go wrong on the sly) and then again the hospital drink the taverns and more hospital, in two or three years - a wreck, and her life over at eighteen or nineteen. Have not I seen cases like that? And how have they been brought to it? Why, they've all come to it like that. Ugh! But what does it matter? That's as it should be, they tell us. A certain percentage, they tell us, must every year go that way to the devil, I suppose, so that the rest may remain chaste, and not be interfered with. A percentage! What splendid words they have; they are so scientific, so consolatory. Once you've said 'percentage' there's nothing more to worry about. If we had any other word maybe we might feel more uneasy. But what if Dounia were one of the percentage! Of another one if not that one?

	"But where am I going?" he thought suddenly. "Strange, I came out for something. As soon as I had read the letter I came out. I was going to Vassilyevsky Ostrov, to Razumihin. That's what it was now I remember. What for, though? And what put the idea of going to Razumihin into my head just now? That's curious."

	He wondered at himself. Razumihin was one of his old comrades at the university. It was remarkable that Raskolnikov had hardly any friends at the university; he kept aloof from everyone, went to see no one, and did not welcome anyone who came to see him, and indeed everyone soon gave him up. He took no part in the students' gatherings, amusements or conversations. He worked with great intensity without sparing himself, and he was respected for this, but no one liked him. He was very poor, and there was a sort of haughty pride and reserve about him, as though he were keeping something to himself. He seemed to some of his comrades to look down upon them all as children, as though he were superior in development, knowledge and convictions, as though their beliefs and interests were beneath him.

	With Razumihin he had got on, or, at least, he was more unreserved and communicative with him. Indeed it was impossible to be on any other terms with Razumihin. He was an exceptionally good - humoured and candid youth, good- natured to the point of simplicity, though both depth and dignity lay concealed under that simplicity. The better of his comrades understood this, and all were fond of him. He was extremely intelligent, though he was certainly rather a simpleton at times. He was of striking appearance - tall, thin, blackhaired and always badly shaved. He was sometimes uproarious and was reputed to be of great physical strength. One night, when out in a festive company, he had with one blow laid a gigantic policeman on his back. There was no limit to his drinking powers, but he could abstain from drink altogether; he sometimes went too far in his pranks; but he could do without pranks altogether. Another thing striking about Razumihin, no failure distressed him, and it seemed as though no unfavourable circumstances could crush him. He could lodge anywhere, and bear the extremes of cold and hunger.

	He was very poor, and kept himself entirely on what he could earn by work of one sort or another. He knew of no end of resources by which to earn money. He spent one whole winter without lighting his stove, and used to declare that he liked it better, because one slept more soundly in the cold. For the present he, too, had been obliged to give up the university, but it was only for a time, and he was working with all his might to save enough to return to his studies again. Raskolnikov had not been to see him for the last four months, and Razumihin did not even know his address. About two months before, they had met in the street, but Raskolnikov had turned away and even crossed to the other side that he might not be observed. And though Razumihin noticed him, he passed him by, as he did not want to annoy him.

	"Of course, I've been meaning lately to go to Razumihin's to ask for work, to ask him to get me lessons or something." Raskolnikov thought, "but what help can he be to me now? Suppose he gets me lessons, suppose he shares his last farthing with me, if he has any farthings, so that I could get some boots and make myself tidy enough to give lessons him. Well and what then? What shall I do with the few coppers I earn? That's not what I want now. It's really absurd for me to go to Razumihin."

	The question why he was now going to Razumihin agitated him even more than he was himself aware; he kept uneasily seeking for some sinister significance in this apparently ordinary action.

	"Could I have expected to set it all straight and to find a way out by means of Razumihin alone?" he asked himself in perplexity.

	He pondered and rubbed his forehead, and, strange to say, after long musing, suddenly, as if it were spontaneously and by chance, a fantastic thought came into his head.

	"Hm to Razumihin's," he said all at once, calmly, as though he had reached a final determination. "I shall go to Razumihin's of course, but not now. I shall go to him on the next day after it, when it will be over and everything will begin afresh."

	And suddenly he realised what he was thinking.

	"After it," he shouted, jumping up from the seat, "but is It really going to happen? Is it possible it really will happen?"

	He left the seat, and went off almost at a run; he meant to turn back, homewards, but the thought of going home suddenly filled him with intense loathing; in that hole, in that awful little cupboard of his, all this had for a month past been growing up in him; and he walked on at random.

	His nervous shudder had passed into a fever that made him feel shivering; in spite of the heat he felt cold. With a kind of effort he began almost unconsciously, from some inner craving, to stare at all the objects before him, as though looking for something to distract his attention; but he did not succeed, and kept dropping every moment into brooding. When with a start he lifted his head again and looked round, he forgot at once what he had just been thinking about and even where he was going. In this way he walked right across Vassilyevsky Ostrov, came out on to the Lesser Neva, crossed the bridge and turned towards the islands. The greenness and freshness were at first restful to his weary eyes after the dust of the town and the huge houses that hemmed him in and weighed upon him. Here there were no taverns, no stifling closeness, no stench. But soon these new pleasant sensations passed into morbid irritability. Sometimes he stood still before a brightly painted summer villa standing among green foliage, he gazed through the fence, he saw in the distance smartly dressed women on the verandahs and balconies, and children running in the gardens. The flowers especially caught his attention; he gazed at them longer than at anything. He was met, too, by luxurious carriages and by men and women on horseback; he watched them with curious eyes and forgot about them before they had vanished from his sight. Once he stood still and counted his money; he found he had thirty copecks. "Twenty to the policeman, three to Nastasya for the letter, so I must have given forty-seven or fifty to the Marmeladovs yesterday," he thought, reckoning it up for some unknown reason, but he soon forgot with what object he had taken the money out of his pocket. He recalled it on passing an eating-house or tavern, and felt that he was hungry. Going into the tavern he drank a glass of vodka and ate a pie of some sort. He finished eating it as he walked away. It was a long while since he had taken vodka and it had an effect upon him at once, though he only drank a wineglassful. His legs felt suddenly heavy and a great drowsiness came upon him. He turned homewards, but reaching Petrovsky Ostrov he stopped completely exhausted, turned off the road into the bushes, sank down upon the grass and instantly fell asleep.

	In a morbid condition of the brain, dreams often have a singular actuality, vividness, and extraordinary semblance of reality. At times monstrous images are created, but the setting and the whole picture are so truth like and filled with details so delicate, so unexpectedly, but so artistically consistent, that the dreamer, were he an artist like Pushkin or Turgenev even, could never have invented them in the waking state. Such sick dreams always remain long in the memory and make a powerful impression on the overwrought and deranged nervous system.

	Raskolnikov had a fearful dream. He dreamt he was back in his childhood in the little town of his birth. He was a child about seven years old, walking into the country with his father on the evening of a holiday. It was a grey and heavy day, the country was exactly as he remembered it; indeed he recalled it far more vividly in his dream than he had done in memory. The little town stood on a level flat as bare as the hand, not even a willow near it; only in the far distance, a copse lay, a dark blur on the very edge of the horizon. A few paces beyond the last market garden stood a tavern, a big tavern, which had always aroused in him a feeling of aversion, even of fear, when he walked by it with his father. There was always a crowd there, always shouting, laughter and abuse, hideous hoarse singing and often fighting. Drunken and horrible-looking figures were hanging about the tavern. He used to cling close to his father, trembling all over when he met them. Near the tavern the road became a dusty track, the dust of which was always black. It was a winding road, and about a hundred paces further on, it turned to the right to the graveyard. In the middle of the graveyard stood a stone church with a green cupola where he used to go to mass two or three times a year with his father and mother, when a service was held in memory of his grandmother, who had long been dead, and whom he had never seen. On these occasions they used to take on a white dish tied up in a table napkin a special sort of rice pudding with raisins stuck in it in the shape of a cross. He loved that church, the old- fashioned, unadorned ikons and the old priest with the shaking head. Near his grandmother's grave, which was marked by a stone, was the little grave of his younger brother who had died at six months old. He did not remember him at all, but he had been told about his little brother, and whenever he visited the graveyard he used religiously and reverently to cross himself and to bow down and kiss the little grave. And now he dreamt that he was walking with his father past the tavern on the way to the graveyard; he was holding his father's hand and looking with dread at the tavern. A peculiar circumstance attracted his attention: there seemed to be some kind of festivity going on, there were crowds of gaily dressed townspeople, peasant women, their husbands, and riff-raff of all sorts, all singing and all more or less drunk. Near the entrance of the tavern stood a cart, but a strange cart. It was one of those big carts usually drawn by heavy carthorses and laden with casks of wine or other heavy goods. He always liked looking at those great cart- horses, with their long manes, thick legs, and slow even pace, drawing along a perfect mountain with no appearance of effort, as though it were easier going with a load than without it. But now, strange to say, in the shafts of such a cart he saw a thin little sorrel beast, one of those peasants' nags which he had often seen straining their utmost under a heavy load of wood or hay, especially when the wheels were stuck in the mud or in a rut. And the peasants would beat them so cruelly, sometimes even about the nose and eyes, and he felt so sorry, so sorry for them that he almost cried, and his mother always used to take him away from the window. All of a sudden there was a great uproar of shouting, singing and the balalaika, and from the tavern a number of big and very drunken peasants came out, wearing red and blue shirts and coats thrown over their shoulders.

	"Get in, get in!" shouted one of them, a young thick-necked peasant with a fleshy face red as a carrot. "I'll take you all, get in!"

	But at once there was an outbreak of laughter and exclamations in the crowd.

	"Take us all with a beast like that!"

	"Why, Mikolka, are you crazy to put a nag like that in such a cart?"

	"And this mare is twenty if she is a day, mates!"

	"Get in, I'll take you all," Mikolka shouted again, leaping first into the cart, seizing the reins and standing straight up in front. "The bay has gone with Matvey," he shouted from the cart--"and this brute, mates, is just breaking my heart, I feel as if I could kill her. She's just eating her head off. Get in, I tell you! I'll make her gallop! She'll gallop!" and he picked up the whip, preparing himself with relish to flog the little mare.

	"Get in! Come along!" The crowd laughed. "Do you hear, she'll gallop!"

	"Gallop indeed! She has not had a gallop in her for the last ten years!"

	"She'll jog along!"

	"Don't you mind her, mates, bring a whip each of you, get ready!"

	"All right! Give it to her!"

	They all clambered into Mikolka's cart, laughing and making jokes. Six men got in and there was still room for more. They hauled in a fat, rosy-cheeked woman. She was dressed in red cotton, in a pointed, beaded headdress and thick leather shoes; she was cracking nuts and laughing. The crowd round them was laughing too and indeed, how could they help laughing? That wretched nag was to drag all the cartload of them at a gallop! Two young fellows in the cart were just getting whips ready to help Mikolka. With the cry of "now," the mare tugged with all her might, but far from galloping, could scarcely move forward; she struggled with her legs, gasping and shrinking from the blows of the three whips which were showered upon her like hail. The laughter in the cart and in the crowd was redoubled, but Mikolka flew into a rage and furiously thrashed the mare, as though he supposed she really could gallop.

	"Let me get in, too, mates," shouted a young man in the crowd whose appetite was aroused.

	"Get in, all get in," cried Mikolka, "she will draw you all. I'll beat her to death!" And he thrashed and thrashed at the mare, beside himself with fury.

	"Father, father," he cried, "father, what are they doing? Father, they are beating the poor horse!"

	"Come along, come along!" said his father. "They are drunken and foolish, they are in fun; come away, don't look!" and he tried to draw him away, but he tore himself away from his hand, and, beside himself with horror, ran to the horse. The poor beast was in a bad way. She was gasping, standing still, then tugging again and almost falling.

	"Beat her to death," cried Mikolka, "it's come to that. I'll do for her!"

	"What are you about, are you a Christian, you devil?" shouted an old man in the crowd.

	"Did anyone ever see the like? A wretched nag like that pulling such a cartload," said another.

	"You'll kill her," shouted the third.

	"Don't meddle! It's my property, I'll do what I choose. Get in, more of you! Get in, all of you! I will have her go at a gallop!

	All at once laughter broke into a roar and covered everything: the mare, roused by the shower of blows, began feebly kicking. Even the old man could not help smiling. To think of a wretched little beast like that trying to kick!

	Two lads in the crowd snatched up whips and ran to the mare to beat her about the ribs. One ran each side.

	"Hit her in the face, in the eyes, in the eyes," cried Mikolka.

	"Give us a song, mates," shouted someone in the cart and everyone in the cart joined in a riotous song, jingling a tambourine and whistling. The woman went on cracking nuts and laughing.

	He ran beside the mare, ran in front of her, saw her being whipped across the eyes, right in the eyes! He was crying, he felt choking, his tears were streaming. One of the men gave him a cut with the whip across the face, he did not feel it. Wringing his hands and screaming, he rushed up to the grey-headed old man with the grey beard, who was shaking his head in disapproval. One woman seized him by the hand and would have taken him away, but he tore himself from her and ran back to the mare. She was almost at the last gasp, but began kicking once more.

	"I'll teach you to kick," Mikolka shouted ferociously. He threw down the whip, bent forward and picked up from the bottom of the cart a long, thick shaft, he took hold of one end with both hands and with an effort brandished it over the mare.

	"He'll crush her," was shouted round him. "He'll kill her!"

	"It's my property," shouted Mikolka and brought the shaft down with a swinging blow. There was a sound of a heavy thud.

	"Thrash her, thrash her! Why have you stopped?" shouted voices in the crowd.

	And Mikolka swung the shaft a second time and it fell a second time on the spine of the luckless mare. She sank back on her haunches, but lurched forward and tugged forward with all her force, tugged first on one side and then on the other, trying to move the cart. But the six whips were attacking her in all directions, and the shaft was raised again and fell upon her a third time, then a fourth, with heavy measured blows. Mikolka was in a fury that he could not kill her at one blow.

	"She's a tough one," was shouted in the crowd.

	"She'll fall in a minute, mates, there will soon be an end of her," said an admiring spectator in the crowd.

	"Fetch an axe to her! Finish her off," shouted a third.

	"I'll show you! Stand off," Mikolka screamed frantically; he threw down the shaft, stooped down in the cart and picked up an iron crowbar. "Look out," he shouted, and with all his might he dealt a stunning blow at the poor mare. The blow fell; the mare staggered, sank back, tried to pull, but the bar fell again with a swinging blow on her back and she fell on the ground like a log.

	"Finish her off," shouted Mikolka and he leapt beside himself, out of the cart. Several young men, also flushed with drink, seized anything they could come across-whips, sticks, poles, and ran to the dying mare. Mikolka stood on one side and began dealing random blows with the crowbar. The mare stretched out her head, drew a long breath and died.

	"You butchered her," someone shouted in the crowd.

	"Why wouldn't she gallop then?"

	"My property!" shouted Mikolka, with bloodshot eyes, brandishing the bar in his hands. He stood as though regretting that he had nothing more to beat.

	"No mistake about it, you are not a Christian," many voices were shouting in the crowd.

	But the poor boy, beside himself, made his way, screaming, through the crowd to the sorrel nag, put his arms round her bleeding dead head and kissed it, kissed the eyes and kissed the lips. Then he jumped up and flew in a frenzy with his little fists out at Mikolka. At that instant his father, who had been running after him, snatched him up and carried him out of the crowd.

	"Come along, come! Let us go home," he said to him.

	"Father! Why did they kill the poor horse!" he sobbed, but his voice broke and the words came in shrieks from his panting chest.

	"They are drunk. They are brutal it's not our business!" said his father. He put his arms round his father but he felt choked, choked. He tried to draw a breath, to cry out - and woke up.

	He waked up, gasping for breath, his hair soaked with perspiration, and stood up in terror.

	"Thank God, that was only a dream," he said, sitting down under a tree and drawing deep breaths. "But what is it? Is it some fever coming on? Such a hideous dream!"

	He felt utterly broken: darkness and confusion were in his soul. He rested his elbows on his knees and leaned his head on his hands.

	"Good God!" he cried, "can it be, can it be, that I shall really take an axe, that I shall strike her on the head, split her skull open that I shall tread in the sticky warm blood, break the lock, steal and tremble; hide, all spattered in the blood with the axe. Good God, can it be?"

	He was shaking like a leaf as he said this.

	"But why am I going on like this?" he continued, sitting up again, as it were in profound amazement. "I knew that I could never bring myself to it, so what have I been torturing myself for till now? Yesterday, yesterday, when I went to make that experiment, yesterday I realised completely that I could never bear to do it. Why am I going over it again, then? Why am I hesitating? As I came down the stairs yesterday, I said myself that it was base, loathsome, vile, vile the very thought of it made me feel sick and filled me with horror.

	"No, I couldn't do it, I couldn't do it! Granted, granted that there is no flaw in all that reasoning, that all that I have concluded this last month is clear as day, true as arithmetic. My God! Anyway I couldn't bring myself to it! I couldn't do it, I couldn't do it! Why, why then am I still?"



	He rose to his feet, looked round in wonder as though surprised at finding himself in this place, and went towards the bridge. He was pale, his eyes glowed, he was exhausted in every limb, but he seemed suddenly to breathe more easily. He felt he had cast off that fearful burden that had so long been weighing upon him, and all at once there was a sense of relief and peace in his soul. "Lord," he prayed, "show me my path-1 renounce that accursed dream of mine."

	Crossing the bridge, he gazed quietly and calmly at the Neva, at the glowing red sun setting in the glowing sky. In spite of his weakness he was not conscious of fatigue. It was as though an abscess that had been forming for a month past in his heart had suddenly broken. Freedom, freedom! He was free from that spell, that sorcery, that obsession!

	Later on, when he recalled that time and all that happened to him during those days, minute by minute, point by point, he was superstitiously impressed by one circumstance, which, though in itself not very exceptional, always seemed to him afterwards the predestined turning-point of his fate. He could never understand and explain to himself why, when he was tired and worn out, when it would have been more convenient for him to go home by the shortest and most direct way, he had returned by the Hay Market where he had no need to go. It was obviously and quite unnecessarily out of his way, though not much so. It is true that it happened to him dozens of times to return home without noticing what streets he passed through. But why, he was always asking himself, why had such an important, such a decisive and at the same time such an absolutely chance meeting happened in the Hay Market (where he had moreover no reason to go) at the very hour, the very minute of his life when he was just in the very mood and in the very circumstances in which that meeting was able to exert the gravest and most decisive influence on his whole destiny? As though it had been lying in wait for him on purpose!

	It was about nine o'clock when he crossed the Hay Market. At the tables and the barrows, at the booths and the shops, all the market people were closing their establishments or clearing away and packing up their wares and, like their customers, were going home. Rag pickers and costermongers of all kinds were crowding round the taverns in the dirty and stinking courtyards of the Hay Market. Raskolnikov particularly liked this place and the neighbouring alleys, when he wandered aimlessly in the streets. Here his rags did not attract contemptuous attention, and one could walk about in any attire without scandalising people. At the corner of an alley a huckster and his wife had two tables set out with tapes, thread, cotton handkerchiefs, etc. They, too, had got up to go home, but were lingering in conversation with a friend, who had just come up to them. This friend was Lizaveta Ivanovna, or, as everyone called her, Lizaveta, the younger sister of the old pawnbroker, Alyona Ivanovna, whom Raskolnikov had visited the previous day to pawn his watch and make his experiment. He already knew all about Lizaveta and she knew him a little too. She was a single woman of about thirty-five, tall, clumsy, timid, submissive and almost idiotic. She was a complete slave and went in fear and trembling of her sister, who made her work day and night, and even beat her. She was standing with a bundle before the huckster and his wife, listening earnestly and doubtfully. They were talking of something with special warmth. The moment Raskolnikov caught sight of her, he was overcome by a strange sensation as it were of intense astonishment, though there was nothing astonishing about this meeting.

	"You could make up your mind for yourself, Lizaveta Ivanovna," the huckster was saying aloud. "Come round to-morrow about seven. They will be here too."

	"To-morrow?" said Lizaveta slowly and thoughtfully, as though unable to make up her mind.

	"Upon my word, what a fright you are in of Alyona Ivanovna," gabbled the huckster's wife, a lively little woman. "I look at you, you are like some little babe. And she is not your own sister either- nothing but a step-sister and what a hand she keeps over you!"

	"But this time don't say a word to Alyona Ivanovna," her husband interrupted; "that's my advice, but come round to us without asking. It will be worth your while. Later on your sister herself may have a notion."

	"Am I to come?"

	"About seven o'clock tomorrow. And they will be here. You will be able to decide for yourself."

	"And we'll have a cup of tea," added his wife.

	"All right, I'll come," said Lizaveta, still pondering, and she began slowly moving away.

	Raskolnikov had just passed and heard no more. He passed softly, unnoticed, trying not to miss a word. His first amazement was followed by a thrill of horror, like a shiver running down his spine. He had learnt, he had suddenly quite unexpectedly learnt, that the next day at seven o'clock Lizaveta, the old woman's sister and only companion, would be away from home and that therefore at seven o'clock precisely the old woman would be left alone.

	He was only a few steps from his lodging. He went in like a man condemned to death. He thought of nothing and was incapable of thinking; but he felt suddenly in his whole being that he had no more freedom of thought, no will, and that everything was suddenly and irrevocably decided.

	Certainly, if he had to wait whole years for a suitable opportunity, he could not reckon on a more certain step towards the success of the plan than that which had just presented itself. In any case, it would have been difficult to find out beforehand and with certainty, with greater exactness and less risk, and without dangerous inquiries and investigations, that next day at a certain time an old woman, on whose life an attempt was contemplated, would be at home and entirely alone.

	Later on Raskolnikov happened to find out why the huckster and his wife had invited Lizaveta. It was a very ordinary matter and there was nothing exceptional about it. A family who had come to the town and been reduced to poverty were selling their household goods and clothes, all women's things. As the things would have fetched little in the market, they were looking for a dealer. This was Lizaveta's business. She undertook such jobs and was frequently employed, as she was very honest and always fixed a fair price and stuck to it. She spoke as a rule little and, as we have said already, she was very submissive and timid.

	But Raskolnikov had become superstitious of late. The traces of superstition remained in him long after, and were almost ineradicable. And in all this he was always afterwards disposed to see something strange and mysterious, as it were, the presence of some peculiar influences and coincidences. In the previous winter a student he knew called Pokorev, who had left for Harkov, had chanced in conversation to give him the address of Alyona Ivanovna, the old pawnbroker, in case he might want to pawn anything. For a long while he did not go to her, for he had lessons and managed to get along somehow. Six weeks ago he had remembered the address; he had two articles that could be pawned: his father's old silver watch and a little gold ring with three red stones, a present from his sister at parting. He decided to take the ring. When he found the old woman he had felt an insurmountable repulsion for her at the first glance, though he knew nothing special about her. He got two roubles from her and went into a miserable little tavern on his way home. He asked for tea, sat down and sank into deep thought. A strange idea was pecking at his brain like a chicken in the egg, and very, very much absorbed him.

	Almost beside him at the next table there was sitting a student, whom he did not know and had never seen, and with him a young officer. They had played a game of billiards and began drinking tea. All at once he heard the student mention to the officer the pawnbroker Alyona Ivanovna and give him her address. This of itself seemed strange to Raskolnikov; he had just come from her and here at once he heard her name. Of course it was a chance, but he could not shake off a very extraordinary impression, and here someone seemed to be speaking expressly for him; the student began telling his friend various details about Alyona Ivanovna.

	"She is first-rate," he said. "You can always get money from her. She is as rich as a Jew, she can give you five thousand roubles at a time and she is not above taking a pledge for a rouble. Lots of our fellows have had dealings with her. But she is an awful old harpy.

	And he began describing how spiteful and uncertain she was, how if you were only a day late with your interest the pledge was lost; how she gave a quarter of the value of an article and took five and even seven percent a month on it and so on. The student chattered on, saying that she had a sister Lizaveta, whom the wretched little creature was continually beating, and kept in complete bondage like a small child, though Lizaveta was at least six feet high.

	"There's a phenomenon for you," cried the student and he laughed.

	They began talking about Lizaveta. The student spoke about her with a peculiar relish and was continually laughing and the officer listened with great interest and asked him to send Lizaveta to do some mending for him. Raskolnikov did not miss a word and learned everything about her. Lizaveta was younger than the old woman and was her half-sister, being the child of a different mother. She was thirty-five. She worked day and night for her sister, and besides doing the cooking and the washing, she did sewing and worked as a charwoman and gave her sister all she earned. She did not dare to accept an order or job of any kind without her sister's permission. The old woman had already made her will, and Lizaveta knew of it, and by this will she would not get a farthing; nothing but the movables, chairs and so on; all the money was left to a monastery in the province of N, that prayers might be said for her in perpetuity. Lizaveta was of lower rank than her sister, unmarried and awfully uncouth in appearance, remarkably tall with long feet that looked as if they were bent outwards. She always wore battered goatskin shoes, and was clean in her person. What the student expressed most surprise and amusement about was the fact that Lizaveta was continually with child.

	"But you say she is hideous?" observed the officer.

	"Yes, she is so dark-skinned and looks like a soldier dressed up, but you know she is not at all hideous. She has such a good-natured face and eyes. Strikingly so. And the proof of it is that lots of people are attracted by her. She is such a soft, gentle creature, ready to put up with anything, always willing, willing to do anything. And her smile is really very sweet."

	"You seem to find her attractive yourself," laughed the officer.

	"From her queerness. No, I'll tell you what. I could kill that damned old woman and make off with her money, I assure you, without the faintest conscience-prick," the student added with warmth. The officer laughed again while Raskolnikov shuddered. How strange it was!

	"Listen, I want to ask you a serious question," the student said hotly. "I was joking of course, but look here; on one side we have a stupid, senseless, worthless, spiteful, ailing, horrid old woman, not simply useless but doing actual mischief, who has not an idea what she is living for herself, and who will die in a day or two in any case. You understand? You understand?"

	"Yes, yes, I understand," answered the officer, watching his excited companion attentively.

	"Well, listen then. On the other side, fresh young lives thrown away for want of help and by thousands, on every side! A hundred thousand good deeds could be done and helped, on that old woman's money which will be buried in a monastery! Hundreds, thousands perhaps, might be set on the right path; dozens of families saved from destitution, from ruin, from vice, from the Lock hospitals - and all with her money. Kill her, take her money and with the help of it devote oneself to the service of humanity and the good of all. What do you think, would not one tiny crime be wiped out by thousands of good deeds? For one life thousands would be saved from corruption and decay. One death, and a hundred lives in exchange it's simple arithmetic!

	Besides, what value has the life of that sickly, stupid, ill-natured old woman in the balance of existence! No more than the life of a louse, of a black-beetle, less in fact because the old woman is doing harm. She is wearing out the lives of others; the other day she bit Lizaveta's finger out of spite; it almost had to be amputated."

	"Of course she does not deserve to live," remarked the officer, "but there it is, it's nature."

	"Oh, well, brother, but we have to correct and direct nature, and, but for that, we should drown in an ocean of prejudice. But for that, there would never have been a single great man. They talk of duty, conscience-1 don't want to say anything against duty and conscience; -but the point is, what do we mean by them. Stay, I have another question to ask you. Listen!"

	"No, you stay, I'll ask you a question. Listen!"

	"Well?"

	"You are talking and speechifying away, but tell me, would you kill the old woman yourself?"

	"Of course not! I was only arguing the justice of it. It's nothing to do with me."

	"But I think, if you would not do it yourself, there's no justice about it.

	Let us have another game."

	Raskolnikov was violently agitated. Of course, it was all ordinary youthful talk and thought, such as he had often heard before in different forms and on different themes. But why had he happened to hear such a discussion and such ideas at the very moment when his own brain was just conceiving the very same ideas? And why, just at the moment when he had brought away the embryo of his idea from the old woman had he dropped at once upon a conversation about her? This coincidence always seemed strange to him. This trivial talk in a tavern had an immense influence on him in his later action; as though there had really been in it something preordained, some guiding hint.

	On returning from the Hay Market he flung himself on the sofa and sat for a whole hour without stirring. Meanwhile it got dark; he had no candle and, indeed, it did not occur to him to light up. He could never recollect whether he had been thinking about anything at that time. At last he was conscious of his former fever and shivering, and he realised with relief that he could lie down on the sofa. Soon heavy, leaden sleep came over him, as it were crushing him.

	He slept an extraordinarily long time and without dreaming. Nastasya, coming into his room at ten o'clock the next morning, had difficulty in rousing him. She brought him in tea and bread. The tea was again the second brew and again in her own tea-pot.

	"My goodness, how he sleeps!" she cried indignantly. "And he is always asleep."

	He got up with an effort. His head ached, he stood up, took a turn in his garret and sank back on the sofa again.

	"Going to sleep again," cried Nastasya. "Are you ill, eh?"

	He made no reply.

	"Do you want some tea?"

	"Afterwards," he said with an effort, closing his eyes again and turning to the wall.

	Nastasya stood over him.

	"Perhaps he really is ill," she said, turned and went out. She came in again at two o'clock with soup. He was lying as before. The tea stood untouched. Nastasya felt positively offended and began wrathfully rousing him.

	"Why are you lying like a log?" she shouted, looking at him with repulsion.

	He got up, and sat down again, but said nothing and stared at the floor.

	"Are you ill or not?" asked Nastasya and again received no answer. "You'd better go out and get a breath of air," she said after a pause. "Will you eat it or not?"

	"Afterwards," he said weakly. "You can go."

	And he motioned her out.

	She remained a little longer, looked at him with compassion and went out.

	A few minutes afterwards, he raised his eyes and looked for a long while at the tea and the soup. Then he took the bread, took up a spoon and began to eat.

	He ate a little, three or four spoonfuls, without appetite, as it were mechanically. His head ached less. After his meal he stretched himself on the sofa again, but now he could not sleep; he lay without stirring, with his face in the pillow. He was haunted by daydreams and such strange daydreams; in one, that kept recurring, he fancied that he was in Africa, in Egypt, in some sort of oasis. The caravan was resting, the camels were peacefully lying down; the palms stood all around in a complete circle; all the party were at dinner. But he was drinking water from a spring which flowed gurgling close by. And it was so cool, it was wonderful, wonderful, blue, cold water running among the parti-coloured stones and over the clean sand which glistened here and there like gold. Suddenly he heard a clock strike. He started, roused himself, raised his head, looked out of the window, and seeing how late it was, suddenly jumped up wide awake as though someone had pulled him off the sofa. He crept on tiptoe to the door, stealthily opened it and began listening on the staircase. His heart beat terribly. But all was quiet on the stairs as if everyone was asleep. It seemed to him strange and monstrous that he could have slept in such forgetfulness from the previous day and had done nothing, had prepared nothing yet. And meanwhile perhaps it had struck six. And his drowsiness and stupefaction were followed by an extraordinary, feverish, as it were distracted haste. But the preparations to be made were few. He concentrated all his energies on thinking of everything and forgetting nothing; and his heart kept beating and thumping so that he could hardly breathe. First he had to make a noose and sew it into his overcoat a work of a moment. He rummaged under his pillow and picked out amongst the linen stuffed away under it, a worn out, old unwashed shirt. From its rags he tore a long strip, a couple of inches wide and about sixteen inches long. He folded this strip in two, took off his wide, strong summer overcoat of some stout cotton material (his only outer garment) and began sewing the two ends of the rag on the inside, under the left armhole. His hands shook as he sewed, but he did it successfully so that nothing showed outside when he put the coat on again. The needle and thread he had got ready long before and they lay on his table in a piece of paper. As for the noose, it was a very ingenious device of his own; the noose was intended for the axe. It was impossible for him to carry the axe through the street in his hands. And if hidden under his coat he would still have had to support it with his hand, which would have been noticeable. Now he had only to put the head of the axe in the noose, and it would hang quietly under his arm on the inside. Putting his hand in his coat pocket, he could hold the end of the handle all the way, so that it did not swing; and as the coat was very full, a regular sack in fact, it could not be seen from outside that he was holding something with the hand that was in the pocket. This noose, too, he had designed a fortnight before.

	When he had finished with this, he thrust his hand into a little opening between his sofa and the floor, fumbled in the left corner and drew out the pledge, which he had got ready long before and hidden there. This pledge was, however, only a smoothly planed piece of wood the size and thickness of a silver cigarette case. He picked up this piece of wood in one of his wanderings in a courtyard where there was some sort of a workshop. Afterwards he had added to the wood a thin smooth piece of iron, which he had also picked up at the same time in the street. Putting the iron which was a little the smaller on the piece of wood, he fastened them very firmly, crossing and re-crossing the thread round them; then wrapped them carefully and daintily in clean white paper and tied up the parcel so that it would be very difficult to untie it. This was in order to divert the attention of the old woman for a time, while she was trying to undo the knot, and so to gain a moment. The iron strip was added to give weight, so that the woman might not guess the first minute that the "thing" was made of wood. All this had been stored by him beforehand under the sofa. He had only just got the pledge out when he heard someone suddenly about in the yard.

	"It struck six long ago."

	"Long ago! My God!"

	He rushed to the door, listened, caught up his hat and began to descend his thirteen steps cautiously, noiselessly, like a cat. He had still the most important thing to do - to steal the axe from the kitchen. That the deed must be done with an axe he had decided long ago. He had also a pocket pruning-knife, but he could not rely on the knife and still less on his own strength, and so resolved finally on the axe. We may note in passing, one peculiarity in regard to all the final resolutions taken by him in the matter; they had one strange characteristic: the more final they were, the more hideous and the more absurd they at once became in his eyes. In spite of all his agonising inward struggle, he never for a single instant all that time could believe in the carrying out of his plans.

	And, indeed, if it had ever happened that everything to the least point could have been considered and finally settled, and no uncertainty of any kind had remained, he would, it seems, have renounced it all as something absurd, monstrous and impossible. But a whole mass of unsettled points and uncertainties remained. As for getting the axe, that trifling business cost him no anxiety, for nothing could be easier. Nastasya was continually out of the house, especially in the evenings; she would run in to the neighbours or to a shop, and always left the door ajar. It was the one thing the landlady was always scolding her about. And so, when the time came, he would only have to go quietly into the kitchen and to take the axe, and an hour later (when everything was over) go in and put it back again. But these were doubtful points. Supposing he returned an hour later to put it back, and Nastasya had come back and was on the spot. He would of course have to go by and wait till she went out again. But supposing she were in the meantime to miss the axe, look for it, make an outcry - that would mean suspicion or at least grounds for suspicion rational objections in himself. But in the last resort he simply ceased to believe in himself, and doggedly, slavishly sought arguments in all directions, fumbling for them, as though someone were forcing and drawing him to it.

	But those were all trifles which he had not even begun to consider, and indeed he had no time. He was thinking of the chief point, and put off trifling details, until he could believe in it all. But that seemed utterly unattainable. So it seemed to himself at least. He could not imagine, for instance, that he would sometime leave off thinking, get up and simply go there. Even his late experiment (i.e. his visit with the object of a final survey of the place) was simply an attempt at an experiment, far from being the real thing, as though one should say "come, let us go and try it - why dream about it!" and at once he had broken down and had run away cursing, in a frenzy with himself. Meanwhile it would seem, as regards the moral question, that his analysis was complete; his casuistry had become keen as a razor, and he could not find.

	At first-long before indeed-he had been much occupied with one question; why almost all crimes are so badly concealed and so easily detected, and why almost all criminals leave such obvious traces? He had come gradually to many different and curious conclusions, and in his opinion the chief reason lay not so much in the material impossibility of concealing the crime, as in the criminal himself. Almost every criminal is subject to a failure of will and reasoning power by a childish and phenomenal heedlessness, at the very instant when prudence and caution are most essential. It was his conviction that this eclipse of reason and failure of will power attacked a man like a disease, developed gradually and reached its highest point just before the perpetration of the crime, continued with equal violence at the moment of the crime and for longer or shorter time after, according to the individual case, and then passed off like any other disease. The question whether the disease gives rise to the crime, or whether the crime from its own peculiar nature is always accompanied by something of the nature of disease, he did not yet feel able to decide.

	When he reached these conclusions, he decided that in his own case there could not be such a morbid reaction, that his reason and will would remain unimpaired at the time of carrying out his design, for the simple reason that his design was "not a crime." We will omit all the process by means of which he arrived at this last conclusion; we have run too far ahead already. We may add only that the practical, purely material difficulties of the affair occupied a secondary position in his mind. "One has but to keep all one's will-power and reason to deal with them, and they will all be overcome at the time when once one has familiarised oneself with the minutest details of the business." But this preparation had never been begun. His final decisions were what he came to trust least, and when the hour struck, it all came to pass quite differently, as it were accidentally and unexpectedly.

	One trifling circumstance upset his calculations, before he had even left the staircase. When he reached the

	landlady's kitchen, the door of which was open as usual, he glanced cautiously in to see whether, in Nastasya's absence, the landlady herself was there, or if not, whether the door to her own room was closed, so that she might not peep out when he went in for the axe. But what was his amazement when he suddenly saw that Nastasya was not only at home in the kitchen, but was occupied there, taking linen out of a basket and hanging it on a line. Seeing him, she left off hanging the clothes, turned to him and stared at him all the time he was passing. He turned away his eyes, and walked past as though he noticed nothing. But it was the end of everything; he had not the axe! He was overwhelmed.

	"What made me think," he reflected, as he went under the gateway, "what made me think that she would be sure not to be at home at that moment! Why, why, why did I assume this so certainly?"

	He was crushed and even humiliated. He could have laughed at himself in his anger. A dull animal rage boiled within him.

	He stood hesitating in the gateway. To go into the street, to go a walk for appearance' sake was revolting; to go back to his room, even more revolting. "And what a chance I have lost forever!" he muttered, standing aimlessly in the gateway, just opposite the porter's little dark room, which was also open. Suddenly he started. From the porter's room, two paces away from him, something shining under the bench to the right caught his eye. He looked about him - nobody. He approached the room on tiptoe, went down two steps into it and in a faint voice called the porter. "Yes, not at home! Somewhere near though, in the yard, for the door is wide open." He dashed to the axe (it was an axe) and pulled it out from under the bench, where it lay between two chunks of wood; at once, before going out, he made it fast in the noose, he thrust both hands into his pockets and went out of the room; no one had noticed him! "When reason fails, the devil helps!" he thought with a strange grin. This chance raised his spirits extraordinarily.

	He walked along quietly and sedately, without hurry, to avoid awakening suspicion. He scarcely looked at the passers-by, tried to escape looking at their faces at all, and to be as little noticeable as possible. Suddenly he thought of his hat. "Good heavens! I had the money the day before yesterday and did not get a cap to wear instead!" A curse rose from the bottom of his soul.

	Glancing out of the corner of his eye into a shop, he saw by a clock on the wall that it was ten minutes past seven. He had to make haste and at the same time to go some way round, so as to approach the house from the other side.

	When he had happened to imagine all this beforehand, he had sometimes thought that he would be very much afraid. But he was not very much afraid now, was not afraid at all, indeed. His mind was even occupied by irrelevant matters, but by nothing for long. As he passed the Yusupov garden, he was deeply absorbed in considering the building of great fountains, and of their refreshing effect on the atmosphere in all the squares. By degrees he passed to the conviction that if the summer garden were extended to the field of Mars, and perhaps joined to the garden of the Mihailovsky Palace, it would be a splendid thing and a great benefit to the town. Then he was interested by the question why in all great towns men are not simply driven by necessity, but in some peculiar way inclined to live in those parts of the town where there are no gardens nor fountains; where there is most dirt and smell and all sorts of nastiness. Then his own walks through the Hay Market came back to his mind, and for a moment he waked up to reality. "What nonsense!" he thought, "better think of nothing at all!"

	"So probably men led to execution clutch mentally at every object that meets them on the way," flashed through his mind, but simply flashed, like lightning; he made haste to dismiss this thought. And by now he was near; here was the house, here was the gate. Suddenly a clock somewhere struck once. "What! can it be half-past seven? Impossible, it must be fast!"

	Luckily for him, everything went well again at the gates. At that very moment, as though expressly for his benefit, a huge waggon of hay had just driven in at the gate, completely screening him as he passed under the gateway, and the waggon had scarcely had time to drive through into the yard, before he had slipped in a flash to the right. On the other side of the waggon he could hear shouting and quarrelling; but no one noticed him and no one met him. Many windows looking into that huge quadrangular yard were open at that moment, but he did not raise his head - he had not the strength to. The staircase leading to the old woman's room was close by, just on the right of the gateway. He was already on the stairs.

	Drawing a breath, pressing his hand against his throbbing heart, and once more feeling for the axe and setting it straight, he began softly and cautiously ascending the stairs, listening every minute. But the stairs, too, were quite deserted; all the doors were shut; he met no one. One flat indeed on the first floor was wide open and painters were at work in it, but they did not glance at him. He stood still, thought a minute and went on. "Of course it would be better if they had not been here, but it's two storeys above them."

	And there was the fourth storey, here was the door, here was the flat opposite, the empty one. The flat underneath the old woman's was apparently empty also; the visiting card nailed on the door had been torn off - they had gone away! He was out of breath. For one instant the thought floated through his mind "Shall I go back?" But he made no answer and began listening at the old woman's door, a dead silence. Then he listened again on the staircase, listened long and intently then looked about him for the last time, pulled himself together, drew himself up, and once more tried the axe in the noose. "Am I very pale?" he wondered. "Am I not evidently agitated? She is mistrustful. Had I better wait a little longer till my heart leaves off thumping?"

	But his heart did not leave off. On the contrary, as though to spite him, it throbbed more and more violently. He could stand it no longer, he slowly put out his hand to the bell and rang. Half a minute later he rang again, more loudly.

	No answer. To go on ringing was useless and out of place. The old woman was, of course, at home, but she was suspicious and alone. He had some knowledge of her habits and once more he put his ear to the door. Either his senses were peculiarly keen (which it is difficult to suppose), or the sound was really very distinct. Anyway, he suddenly heard something like the cautious touch of a hand on the lock and the rustle of a skirt at the very door. Someone was standing stealthily close to the lock and just as he was doing on the outside was secretly listening within, and seemed to have her ear to the door.

	He moved a little on purpose and muttered something aloud that he might not have the appearance of hiding, then rang a third time, but quietly, soberly, and without impatience, Recalling it afterwards, that moment stood out in his mind vividly, distinctly, forever; he could not make out how he had had such cunning, for his mind was as it were clouded at moments and he was almost unconscious of his body. An instant later he heard the latch unfastened.

	Fearing the old woman would be frightened by their being alone, and not hoping that the sight of him would disarm her suspicions, he took hold of the door and drew it towards him to prevent the old woman from attempting to shut it again. Seeing this she did not pull the door back, but she did not let go the handle so that he almost dragged her out with it on to the stairs. Seeing that she was standing in the doorway not allowing him to pass, he advanced straight upon her. She stepped back in alarm, tried to say something, but seemed unable to speak and stared with open eyes at him.

	"Good evening, Alyona Ivanovna," he began, trying to speak easily, but his voice would not obey him, it broke and shook. "I have come I have brought something but we'd better come into the light"

	And leaving her, he passed straight into the room uninvited. The old woman ran after him; her tongue was unloosed.

	"Good heavens! What it is? Who is it? What do you want?"

	"Why, Alyona Ivanovna, you know me Raskolnikov here, I brought you the pledge I promised the other day." And he held out the pledge.

	The old woman glanced for a moment at the pledge, but at once stared in the eyes of her uninvited visitor. She looked intently, maliciously and mistrustfully. A minute passed; he even fancied something like a sneer in her eyes, as though she had already guessed everything. He felt that he was losing his head, that he was almost frightened, so frightened that if she were to look like that and not say a word for another half minute, he thought he would have run away from her.

	"Why do you look at me as though you did not know me?" he said suddenly, also with malice. "Take it if you like, if not I'll go elsewhere, I am in a hurry."

	He had not even thought of saying this, but it was suddenly said of itself. The old woman recovered herself, and her visitor's resolute tone evidently restored her confidence.

	"But why, my good sir, all of a minute. What is it?" she asked, looking at the pledge.

	"The silver cigarette case; I spoke of it last time, you know."

	She held out her hand.

	"Fever," he answered abruptly. "You can't help getting pale if you've nothing to eat," he added, with difficulty articulating the words.

	His strength was failing him again. But his answer sounded like the truth; the old woman took the pledge.

	"What is it?" she asked once more, scanning Raskolnikov intently, and weighing the pledge in her hand.

	"A thing cigarette case Silver. Look at it."

	"It does not seem somehow like silver. How he has wrapped it up!"

	Trying to untie the string and turning to the window, to the light (all her windows were shut, in spite of the stifling heat), she left him altogether for some seconds and stood with her back to him. He unbuttoned his coat and freed the axe from the noose, but did not yet take it out altogether, simply holding it in his right hand under the coat. His hands were fearfully weak, he felt them every moment growing more numb and more wooden. He was afraid he would let the axe slip and fall. A sudden giddiness came over him.

	"But what has he tied it up like this for?" the old woman cried with vexation and moved towards him.

	He had not a minute more to lose. He pulled the axe quite out, swung it with both arms, scarcely conscious of himself, and almost without effort, almost mechanically, brought the blunt side down on her head. He seemed not to use his own strength in this. But as soon as he had once brought the axe down, his strength returned to him.

	The old woman was as always bareheaded. Her thin, light hair, streaked with grey, thickly smeared with grease, was plaited in a rat's tail and fastened by a broken horn comb which stood out on the nape of her neck. As she was so short, the blow fell on the very top of her skull. She cried out, but very faintly, and suddenly sank all of a heap on the floor, raising her hands to her head. In one hand she still held "the pledge." Then he dealt her another and another blow with the blunt side and on the same spot. The blood gushed as from an overturned glass, the body fell back. He stepped back, let it fall, and at once bent over her face; she was dead. Her eyes seemed to be starting out of their sockets, the brow and the whole face were drawn and contorted convulsively.

	He laid the axe on the ground near the dead body and felt at once in her pocket (trying to avoid the streaming body - the same right-hand pocket from which she had taken the key on his last visit. He was in full possession of his faculties, free from confusion or giddiness, but his hands were still trembling. He remembered afterwards that he had been particularly collected and careful, trying all the time not to get smeared with blood. He pulled out the keys at once, they were all, as before, in one bunch on a steel ring. He ran at once into the bedroom with them. It was a very small room with a whole shrine of holy images. Against the other wall stood a big bed, very clean and covered with a silk patchwork wadded quilt. Against a third wall was a chest of drawers. Strange to say, so soon as he began to fit the keys into the chest, so soon as he heard their jingling, a convulsive shudder passed over him. He suddenly felt tempted again to give it all up and go away. But that was only for an instant; it was too late to go back. He positively smiled at himself, when suddenly another terrifying idea occurred to his mind. He suddenly fancied that the old woman might be still alive and might recover her senses. Leaving the keys in the chest, he ran back to the body, snatched up the axe and lifted it once more over the old woman, but did not bring it down. There was no doubt that she was dead. Bending down and examining her again more closely, he saw clearly that the skull was broken and even battered in on one side. He was about to feel it with his finger, but drew back his hand and indeed it was evident without that. Meanwhile there was a perfect pool of blood. All at once he noticed a string on her neck; he tugged at it, but the string was strong and did not snap and besides, it was soaked with blood. He tried to pull it out from the front of the dress, but something held it and prevented its coming. In his impatience he raised the axe again to cut the string from above on the body, but did not dare, and with difficulty, smearing his hand and the axe in the blood, after two minutes' hurried effort, he cut the string and took it off without touching the body with the axe; he was not mistaken - it was a purse. On the string were two crosses, one of Cyprus wood and one of copper, and an image in silver filigree, and with them a small greasy chamois leather purse with a steel rim and ring. The purse was stuffed very full; Raskolnikov thrust it in his pocket without looking at it, flung the crosses on the old woman's body and rushed back into the bedroom, this time taking the axe with him.

	He was in terrible haste, he snatched the keys, and began trying them again. But he was unsuccessful. They would not fit in the locks. It was not so much that his hands were shaking, but that he kept making mistakes; though he saw for instance that a key was not the right one and would not fit, still he tried to put it in. Suddenly he remembered and realised that the big key with the deep notches, which was hanging there with the small keys could not possibly belong to the chest of drawers (on his last visit this had struck him), but to some strong box, and that everything perhaps was hidden in that box. He left the chest of drawers, and at once felt under the bedstead, knowing that old women usually keep boxes under their beds. And so it was; there was a good-sized box under the bed, at least a yard in length, with an arched lid covered with red leather and studded with steel nails. The notched key fitted at once and unlocked it. At the top, under a white sheet, was a coat of red brocade lined with hareskin under it was a silk dress, then a shawl and it seemed as though there was nothing below but clothes. The first thing he did was to wipe his blood- stained hands on the red brocade. "It's red, and on red blood will be less noticeable," the thought passed through his mind; then he suddenly came to himself. "Good God, am I going out of my senses?" he thought with terror.

	But no sooner did he touch the clothes than a gold watch slipped from under the fur coat. He made haste to turn them all over. There turned out to be various articles made of gold among the clothes-probably all pledges, unredeemed or waiting to be redeemed-bracelets, chains, ear-rings, pins and such things. Some were in cases, others simply wrapped in newspaper, carefully and exactly folded, and tied round with tape. Without any delay, he began filling up the pockets of his trousers and overcoat without examining or undoing the parcels and cases; but he had not time to take many.

	He suddenly heard steps in the room where the old woman lay. He stopped short and was still as death. But all was quiet, so it must have been his fancy. All at once he heard distinctly a faint cry, as though someone had uttered a low broken moan. Then again dead silence for a minute or two. He sat squatting on his heels by the box and waited holding his breath. Suddenly he jumped up, seized the axe and ran out of the bedroom.

	In the middle of the room stood Lizaveta with a big bundle in her arms. She was gazing in stupefaction at her murdered sister, white as a sheet and seeming not to have the strength to cry out. Seeing him run out of the bedroom, she began faintly quivering all over, like a leaf, a shudder ran down her face; she lifted her hand, opened her mouth, but still did not scream. She began slowly backing away from him into the corner, staring intently, persistently at him, but still uttered no sound, as though she could not get breath to scream. He rushed at her with the axe; her mouth twitched piteously, as one sees babies' mouths, when they begin to be frightened, stare intently at what frightens them and are on the point of screaming. And this hapless Lizaveta was so simple and had been so thoroughly crushed and scared that she did not even raise a hand to guard her face, though that was the most necessary and natural action at the moment, for the axe was raised over her face. She only put up her empty left hand, but not to her face, slowly holding it out before her as though motioning him away. The axe fell with the sharp edge just on the skull and split at one blow all the top of the head. She fell heavily at once. Raskolnikov completely lost his head, snatching up her bundle, dropped it again and ran into the entry.

	Fear gained more and more mastery over him, especially after this second, quite unexpected murder. He longed to run away from the place as fast as possible. And if at that moment he had been capable of seeing and reasoning more correctly, if he had been able to realise all the difficulties of his position, the hopelessness, the hideousness and the absurdity of it, if he could have understood how many obstacles and, perhaps, crimes he had still to overcome or to commit, to get out of that place and to make his way home, it is very possible that he would have flung up everything, and would have gone to give himself up, and not from fear, but from simple horror and loathing of what he had done. The feeling of loathing especially surged up within him and grew stronger every minute. He would not now have gone to the box or even into the room for anything in the world.

	But a sort of blankness, even dreaminess, had begun by degrees to take possession of him; at moments he forgot himself, or rather, forgot what was of importance, and caught at trifles. Glancing, however, into the kitchen and seeing a bucket half full of water on a bench, he bethought him of washing his hands and the axe. His hands were sticky with blood. He dropped the axe with the blade in the water, snatched a piece of soap that lay in a broken saucer on the window, and began washing his hands in the bucket. When they were clean, he took out the axe, washed the blade and spent a long time, about three minutes, washing the wood where there were spots of blood rubbing them with soap. Then he wiped it all with some linen that was hanging to dry on a line in the kitchen and then he was a long while attentively examining the axe at the window. There was no trace left on it, only the wood was still damp. He carefully hung the axe in the noose under his coat. Then as far as was possible, in the dim light in the kitchen, he looked over his overcoat, his trousers and his boots. At the first glance there seemed to be nothing but stains on the boots. He wetted the rag and rubbed the boots. But he knew he was not looking thoroughly, that there might be something quite noticeable that he was overlooking. He stood in the middle of the room, lost in thought. Dark agonising ideas rose in his mind - the idea that he was mad and that at that moment he was incapable of reasoning, of protecting himself, that he ought perhaps to be doing something utterly different from what he was now doing. "Good God!" he muttered "I must fly, fly," and he rushed into the entry. But here a shock of terror awaited him such as he had never known before.

	He stood and gazed and could not believe his eyes: the door, the outer door from the stairs, at which he had not long before waited and rung, was standing unfastened and at least six inches open. No lock, no bolt, all the time, all that time! The old woman had not shut it after him perhaps as a precaution. But, good God! Why, he had seen Lizaveta afterwards! And how could he, how could he have failed to reflect that she must have come in somehow! She could not have come through the wall!

	He dashed to the door and fastened the latch.

	"But no, the wrong thing again! I must get away, get away."

	He unfastened the latch, opened the door and began listening on the staircase.

	He listened a long time. Somewhere far away, it might be in the gateway, two voices were loudly and shrilly shouting, quarrelling and scolding. "What are they about?" He waited patiently. At last all was still, as though suddenly cut off; they had separated. He was meaning to go out, but suddenly, on the floor below, a door was noisily opened and someone began going downstairs humming a tune.

	"How is it they all make such a noise?" flashed through his mind. Once more he closed the door and waited. At last all was still, not a soul stirring. He was just taking a step towards the stairs when he heard fresh footsteps.

	The steps sounded very far off, at the very bottom of the stairs, but he remembered quite clearly and distinctly that from the first sound he began for some reason to suspect that this was someone coming there, to the fourth floor, to the old woman. Why? Were the sounds somehow peculiar, significant? The steps were heavy, even and unhurried. Now he had passed the first floor, now he was mounting higher, it was growing more and more distinct! He could hear his heavy breathing. And now the third storey had been reached. Coming here! And it seemed to him all at once that he was turned to stone, that it was like a dream in which one is being pursued, nearly caught and will be killed, and is rooted to the spot and cannot even move one's arms.

	At last when the unknown was mounting to the fourth floor, he suddenly started, and succeeded in slipping neatly and quickly back into the flat and closing the door behind him. Then he took the hook and softly, noiselessly, fixed it in the catch. Instinct helped him. When he had done this, he crouched holding his breath, by the door. The unknown visitor was by now also at the door. They were now standing opposite one another, as he had just before been standing with the old woman, when the door divided them and he was listening.

	The visitor panted several times. "He must be a big, fat man," thought Raskolnikov, squeezing the axe in his hand. It seemed like a dream indeed. The visitor took hold of the bell and rang it loudly.

	As soon as the tin bell tinkled, Raskolnikov seemed to be aware of something moving in the room. For some seconds he listened quite seriously. The unknown rang again, waited and suddenly tugged violently and impatiently at the handle of the door. Raskolnikov gazed in horror at the hook shaking in its fastening, and in blank terror expected every minute that the fastening would be pulled out. It certainly did seem possible, so violently was he shaking it. He was tempted to hold the fastening, but he might be aware of it. A giddiness came over him again. "I shall fall down!" flashed through his mind, but the unknown began to speak and he recovered himself at once.

	"What's up? Are they asleep or murdered? D-damn them!" he bawled in a thick voice, "Hey, Alyona Ivanovna, old witch! Lizaveta Ivanovna, hey, my beauty! Open the door! Oh, damn them! Are they asleep or what?"

	And again, enraged, he tugged with all his might a dozen times at the bell. He must certainly be a man of authority and an intimate acquaintance.

	At this moment light hurried steps were heard not far off, on the stairs. Someone else was approaching. Raskolnikov had not heard them at first.

	"You don't say there's no one at home," the new-comer cried in a cheerful, ringing voice, addressing the first visitor, who still went on pulling the bell. "Good evening, Koch."

	"From his voice he must be quite young," thought Raskolnikov.

	"Who the devil can tell? I've almost broken the lock," answered Koch. "But how do you come to know me?

	"Why! The day before yesterday I beat you three times running at billiards at Gambrinus'."

	"Oh!"

	"So they are not at home? That's queer. It's awfully stupid though. Where could the old woman have gone? I've come on business."

	"Yes; and I have business with her, too."

	"Well, what can we do? Go back, I suppose, Aie-aie! And I was hoping to get some money!" cried the young man.

	"We must give it up, of course, but what did she fix this time for? The old witch fixed the time for me to come herself. It's out of my way. And where the devil she can have got to, I can't make out. She sits here from year's end to year's end, the old hag; her legs are bad and yet here all of a sudden she is out for a walk!"

	"Hadn't we better ask the porter?"

	"What?"

	"Where she's gone and when she'll be back."

	"Hm... Damn it all! We might ask. But you know she never does go anywhere."

	And he once more tugged at the door-handle.

	"Damn it all. There's nothing to be done, we must go!"

	"Stay!" cried the young man suddenly. "Do you see how the door shakes if you pull it?"

	"Well?"

	"That shows it's not locked, but fastened with the hook! Do you hear how the hook clanks?"

	"Well?"

	"Why, don't you see? That proves that one of them is at home. If they were all out, they would have locked the door from the outside with the key and not with the hook from inside. There, do you hear how the hook is clanking? To fasten the hook on the inside they must be at home, don't you see. So there they are sitting inside and don't open the door!"

	"Well! And so they must be!" cried Koch, astonished. "What are they about in there?" And he began furiously shaking the door.

	"Stay!" cried the young man again. "Don't pull at it! There must be something wrong. Here, you've been ringing and pulling at the door and still they don't open! So either they've both fainted or."

	"What?"

	"I tell you what. Let's go fetch the porter, let him wake them up."

	"All right."

	Both were going down.

	"Stay. You stop here while I run down for the porter."

	"What for?"

	"Well, you'd better."

	"All right."

	"I'm studying the law you see! It's evident, e-vi-dent there's something wrong here!" the young man cried hotly, and he ran downstairs.

	Koch remained. Once more he softly touched the bell which gave one tinkle, then gently, as though reflecting and looking about him, began touching the door-handle pulling it and letting it go to make sure once more that it was only fastened by the hook. Then puffing and panting he bent down and began looking at the keyhole: but the key was in the lock on the inside and so nothing could be seen.

	Raskolnikov stood keeping tight hold of the axe. He was in a sort of delirium. He was even making ready to fight when they should come in. While they were knocking and talking together, the idea several times occurred to him to end it all at once and shout to them through the door. Now and then he was tempted to swear at them, to jeer at them, while they could not open the door! "Only make haste!" was the thought that flashed through his mind.

	"But what the devil is he about?" Time was passing, one minute, and another - no one came. Koch began to be restless.

	"What the devil?" he cried suddenly and in impatience deserting his sentry duty, he, too, went down, hurrying and thumping with his heavy boots on the stairs. The steps died away.

	"Good heavens! What am I to do?"

	Raskolnikov unfastened the hook, opened the door-there was no sound. Abruptly, without any thought at all, he went out, closing the door as thoroughly as he could, and went downstairs.

	He had gone down three flights when he suddenly heard a loud voice below - where could he go! There was nowhere to hide. He was just going back to the flat.

	"Hey there! Catch the brute!"

	Somebody dashed out of a flat below, shouting, and rather fell than ran down the stairs, bawling at the top of his voice.

	"Mitka! Mitka! Mitka! Mitka! Mitka! Blast him!"

	The shout ended in a shriek; the last sounds came from the yard; all was still. But at the same instant several men talking loud and fast began noisily mounting the stairs. There were three or four of them. He distinguished the ringing voice of the young man. "They!"

	Filled with despair he went straight to meet them, feeling "come what must!" If they stopped him - all was lost; if they let him pass-all was lost too; they would remember him. They were approaching; they were only a flight from him - and suddenly deliverance! A few steps from him on the right, there was an empty flat with the door wide open, the flat on the second floor where the painters had been at work, and which, as though for his benefit, they had just left. It was they, no doubt, who had just run down, shouting. The floor had only just been painted, in the middle of the room stood a pail and a broken pot with paint and brushes. In one instant he had whisked in at the open door and hidden behind the wall and only in the nick of time; they had already reached the landing. Then they turned and went on up to the fourth floor, talking loudly. He waited, went out on tiptoe and ran down the stairs.

	No one was on the stairs, nor in the gateway. He passed quickly through the gateway and turned to the left in the street.

	He knew, he knew perfectly well that at that moment they were at the flat, that they were greatly astonished at finding it unlocked, as the door had just been fastened, that by now they were looking at the bodies, that before another minute had passed they would guess and completely realise that the murderer had just been there, and had succeeded in hiding somewhere, slipping by them and escaping. They would guess most likely that he had been in the empty flat, while they were going upstairs. And meanwhile he dared not quicken his pace much, though the next turning was still nearly a hundred yards away. "Should he slip through some gateway and wait somewhere in an unknown street? No, hopeless! Should he fling away the axe? Should he take a cab? Hopeless, hopeless!"

	At last he reached the turning. He turned down it more dead than alive. Here he was half way to safety, and he understood it; it was less risky because there was a great crowd of people, and he was lost in it like a grain of sand. But all he had suffered had so weakened him that he could scarcely move. Perspiration ran down him in drops, his neck was all wet. "My word, he has been going it!" someone shouted at him when he came out on the canal bank.

	He was only dimly conscious of himself now, and the farther he went the worse it was. He remembered however, that on coming out on to the canal bank, he was alarmed at finding few people there and so being more conspicuous, and he had thought of turning back. Though he was almost falling from fatigue, he went a long way round so as to get home from quite a different direction.

	He was not fully conscious when he passed through the gateway of his house! He was already on the staircase before he recollected the axe. And yet he had a very grave problem before him, to put it back and to escape observation as far as possible in doing so. He was of course incapable of reflecting that it might perhaps be far better not to restore the axe at all, but to drop it later on in somebody's yard. But it all happened fortunately, the door of the porter's room was closed but not locked, so that it seemed most likely that the porter was at home. But he had so completely lost all power of reflection that he walked straight to the door and opened it. If the porter had asked him, "What do you want?" he would perhaps have simply handed him the axe. But again the porter was not at home, and he succeeded in putting the axe back under the bench, and even covering it with the chunk of wood as before. He met no one, not a soul, afterwards on the way to his room; the landlady's door was shut. When he was in his room, he flung himself on the sofa just as he was - he did not sleep, but sank into blank forgetfulness. If anyone had come into his room then, he would have jumped up at once and screamed. Scraps and shreds of thoughts were simply swarming in his brain, but he could not catch at one, he could not rest on one, in spite of all his efforts.





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	CHAPTER ONE

	The red room



	We could not go for a walk that afternoon. There was such a freezing cold wind, and such heavy rain, that we all stayed indoors. I was glad of it. I never liked long walks, especially in winter. I used to hate coming home when it was almost dark, with ice-cold fingers and toes, feeling miserable because Bessie, the nursemaid, was always scolding me. All the time I knew I was different from my cousins, Eliza, John and Georgiana Reed.

	They were taller and stronger than me, and they were loved.

	These three usually spent their time crying and quarrelling, but today they were sitting quietly around their mother in the sitting-room. I wanted to join the family circle, but Mrs. Reed, my aunt, refused. Bessie had complained about me.

	'No, I'm sorry, Jane. Until I hear from Bessie, or see for myself, that you are really trying to behave better, you cannot be treated as a good, happy child, like my children.'

	'What does Bessie say I have done?' I asked.

	'Jane, it is not polite to question me in that way. If you cannot speak pleasantly, be quiet.'

	I crept out of the sitting-room and into the small room next door, where I chose a book full of pictures from the bookcase. I climbed on to the window-seat and drew the curtains, so that I was completely hidden. I sat there for a while. Sometimes I looked out of the window at the grey November afternoon, and saw the rain pouring down on the leafless garden. But most of the time I studied the book and stared, fascinated, at the pictures. Lost in the world of imagination, I forgot my sad, lonely existence for a while, and was happy. I was only afraid that my secret hiding-place might be discovered.

	Suddenly the door of the room opened. John Reed rushed in.

	'Where are you, rat?' he shouted. He did not see me behind the curtain. 'Eliza! Georgy! Jane isn't here! Tell Mamma she's run out into the rain - what a bad animal she is!'

	'How lucky I drew the curtain,' I thought. He would never have found me, because he was not very intelligent. But Eliza guessed at once where I was.

	'She's in the window-seat, John,' she called from the sitting-room. So I came out immediately, as I did not want him to pull me out.

	'What do you want?' I asked him.

	'Say, "What do you want, Master Reed",' he answered, sitting in an armchair. 'I want you to come here.'

	John Reed was fourteen and I was only ten. He was large and rather fat. He usually ate too much at meals, which made him ill. He should have been at boarding school, but his mother, who loved him very much, had brought him home for a month or two, because she thought his health was delicate. John did not love his mother or his sisters, and he hated me. He bullied and punished me, not two or three times a week, not once or twice a day, but all the time. My whole body trembled when he came near. Sometimes he hit me, sometimes he just threatened me, and I lived in terrible fear of him. I had no idea how to stop him. The servants did not want to offend their young master, and Mrs. Reed could see no fault in her dear boy.

	So I obeyed John's order and approached his armchair, thinking how very ugly his face was. Perhaps he understood what I was thinking, for he hit me hard on the face.

	'That is for your rudeness to Mamma just now,' he said, 'and for your wickedness in hiding, and for looking at me like that, you rat!'

	I was so used to his bullying that I never thought of hitting him back.

	'What were you doing behind that curtain?' he asked.

	'I was reading,' I answered.

	'Show me the book.' I gave it to him.

	'You have no right to take our books,' he continued. 'You have no money and your father left you none. You ought to beg in the streets, not live here in comfort with a gentleman's family. Anyway, all these books are mine, and so is the whole house, or will be in a few years' time. I'll teach you not to borrow my books again.' He lifted the heavy book and threw it hard at me.

	It hit me and I fell, cutting my head on the door. I was in great pain, and suddenly for the first time in my life, I forgot my fear of John Reed.

	'You wicked, cruel boy!' I cried. 'You are a bully! You are as bad as a murderer!'

	'What! What!' he cried. 'Did she say that to me? Did you hear, Eliza and Georgiana? I'll tell Mamma, but first...'

	He rushed to attack me, but now he was fighting with a desperate girl. I really saw him as a wicked murderer. I felt the blood running down my face, and the pain gave me strength. I fought back as hard as I could. My resistance surprised him, and he shouted for help. His sisters ran for Mrs. Reed, who called her maid, Miss Abbott, and Bessie. They pulled us apart and I heard them say, 'What a wicked girl! She attacked Master John!'

	Mrs. Reed said calmly, 'Take her away to the red room and lock her in there.' And so I was carried upstairs, arms waving and legs kicking.

	As soon as we arrived in the red room, I became quiet again, and the two servants both started scolding me.

	'Really, Miss Eyre,' said Miss Abbott, 'how could you hit him? He's your young master!'

	'How can he be my master? I am not a servant!' I cried.

	'No, Miss Eyre, you are less than a servant, because you do not work,' replied Miss Abbott. They both looked at me as if they strongly disapproved of me.

	'You should remember, miss,' said Bessie, 'that your aunt pays for your food and clothes, and you should be grateful. You have no other relations or friends.'

	All my short life I had been told this, and I had no answer to it. I stayed silent, listening to these painful reminders.

	'And if you are angry and rude, Mrs. Reed may send you away,' added Bessie.

	'Anyway,' said Miss Abbott, 'God will punish you, Jane Eyre, for your wicked heart. Pray to God, and say you're sorry.' They left the room, locking the door carefully behind them.

	The red room was a cold, silent room, hardly ever used, although it was one of the largest bedrooms in the house. Nine years ago my uncle, Mr. Reed, had died in this room, and since then nobody had wanted to sleep in it.

	Now that I was alone I thought bitterly of the people I lived with. John Reed, his sisters, his mother, the servants - they all accused me, scolded me, hated me. Why could I never please them? Eliza was selfish, but was respected. Georgiana had a bad temper, but she was popular with everybody because she was beautiful. John was rude, cruel and violent, but nobody punished him. I tried to make no mistakes, but they called me naughty every moment of the day. Now that I had turned against John to protect myself, everybody blamed me.

	And so I spent that whole long afternoon in the red room asking myself why I had to suffer and why life was so unfair. Perhaps I would run away, or starve myself to death.

	Gradually it became dark outside. The rain was still beating on the windows, and I could hear the wind in the trees. Now I was no longer angry, and I began to think the Reeds might be right. Perhaps I was wicked. Did I deserve to die, and be buried in the churchyard like my uncle Reed? I could not remember him, but knew he was my mother's brother, who had taken me to his house when my parents both died. On his death bed he had made his wife, Aunt Reed, promise to look after me like her own children. I supposed she now regretted her promise.

	A strange idea came to me. I felt sure that if Mr. Reed had lived he would have treated me kindly, and now, as I looked round at the dark furniture and the walls in shadow, I began to fear that his ghost might come back to punish his wife for not keeping her promise. He might rise from the grave in the churchyard and appear in this room! I was so frightened by this thought that I hardly dared to breathe. Suddenly in the darkness I saw a light moving on the ceiling. It may have been from a lamp outside, but in my nervous state I did not think of that. I felt sure it must be a ghost, a visitor from another world. My head was hot, my heart beat fast. Was that the sound of wings in my ears? Was that something moving near me? Screaming wildly, I rushed to the door and shook it. Miss Abbott and Bessie came running to open it.

	'Miss Eyre, are you ill?' asked Bessie.

	'Take me out of here!' I screamed.

	'Why? What's the matter?' she asked.

	'I saw a light, and I thought it was a ghost,' I cried, holding tightly on to Bessie's hand.

	'She's not even hurt,' said Miss Abbott in disgust. 'She screamed just to bring us here. I know all her little tricks.'

	'What is all this?' demanded an angry voice. Mrs. Reed appeared at the door of the room. 'Abbott and Bessie, I think I told you to leave Jane Eyre in this room till I came.'

	'She screamed so loudly, ma'am,' said Bessie softly.

	'Let go of her hands, Bessie,' was Mrs. Reed's only answer. 'Jane Eyre, you need not think you can succeed in getting out of the room like this. Your naughty tricks will not work with me. You will stay here an hour longer as a punishment for trying to deceive us.'

	'Oh aunt, please forgive me! I can't bear it! I shall die if you keep me here...' I screamed and kicked as she held me.

	'Silence! Control yourself!' She pushed me, resisting wildly, back into the red room and locked me in. There I was in the darkness again, with the silence and the ghosts. I must have fainted. I cannot remember anything more.



	CHAPTER TWO

	Leaving Gateshead

	I woke up to find the doctor lifting me very carefully into my own bed. It was good to be back in my familiar bedroom, with a warm fire and candle-light. It was also a great relief to recognize Dr Lloyd, who Mrs. Reed called in for her servants (she always called a specialist for herself and the children). He was looking after me so kindly. I felt he would protect me from Mrs. Reed. He talked to me a little, then gave Bessie orders to take good care of me. When he left, I felt very lonely again.

	But I was surprised to find that Bessie did not scold me at all. In fact she was so kind to me that I became brave enough to ask a question.

	'Bessie, what's happened? Am I ill?'

	'Yes, you became ill in the red room, but you'll get better, don't worry, Miss Jane,' she answered. Then she went next door to fetch another servant. I could hear her whispers.

	'Sarah, come in here and sleep with me and that poor child tonight. I daren't stay alone with her, she might die. She was so ill last night! Do you think she saw a ghost? Mrs. Reed was too hard on her, I think.' So the two servants slept in my room, while I lay awake all night, trembling with fear, and eyes wide open in horror, imagining ghosts in every corner.

	Fortunately I suffered no serious illness as a result of my terrible experience in the red room, although I shall never forget that night. But the shock left me nervous and depressed for the next few days. I cried all day long and although Bessie tried hard to tempt me with nice things to eat or my favourite books, I took no pleasure in eating or even in reading. I knew I had no one to love me and nothing to look forward to.

	When the doctor came again, he seemed a little surprised to find me looking so miserable.

	'Perhaps she's crying because she couldn't go out with Mrs Reed in the carriage this morning,' suggested Bessie.

	'Surely she's more sensible than that,' said the doctor, smiling at me. 'She's a big girl now.'

	'I'm not crying about that. I hate going out in the carriage,' I said quickly. 'I'm crying because I'm miserable.'

	'Oh really, Miss!' said Bessie.

	The doctor looked at me thoughtfully. He had small, grey, intelligent eyes. Just then a bell rang for the servants' dinner.

	'You can go, Bessie,' he said. 'I'll stay here talking to Miss Jane till you come back.'

	After Bessie had left, he asked, 'What really made you ill?'

	'I was locked up in a room with a ghost, in the dark.'

	'Afraid of ghosts, are you?' he smiled.

	'Of Mr. Reed's ghost, yes. He died in that room, you know. Nobody even goes in there any more. It was cruel to lock me in there alone without a candle. I shall never forget it!'

	'But you aren't afraid now. There must be another reason why you are so sad,' he said, looking kindly at me.

	How could I tell him all the reasons for my unhappiness!

	'I have no father or mother, brothers or sisters,' I began.

	'But you have a kind aunt and cousins.'

	'But John Reed knocked me down and my aunt locked me in the red room,' I cried. There was a pause.

	'Don't you like living at Gateshead, in such a beautiful house?' he asked.

	'I would be glad to leave it, but I have nowhere else to go.'

	'You have no relations apart from Mrs. Reed?'

	'I think I may have some, who are very poor, but I know nothing about them,' I answered.

	'Would you like to go to school?' he asked finally. I thought for a moment. I knew very little about school, but at least it would be a change, the start of a new life.

	'Yes, I would like to go,' I replied in the end.

	'Well, well,' said the doctor to himself as he got up, 'we'll see. The child is delicate, she ought to have a change of air.'

	I heard later from the servants that he had spoken to Mrs. Reed about me, and that she had agreed immediately to send me to school. Abbott said Mrs. Reed would be glad to get rid of me. In this conversation I also learned for the first time that my father had been a poor vicar. When he married my mother, Miss Jane Reed of Gateshead, the Reed family were so angry that they disinherited her. I also heard that my parents both died of an illness only a year after their wedding.

	But days and weeks passed, and Mrs. Reed still said nothing about sending me to school. One day, as she was scolding me, I suddenly threw a question at her. The words just came out without my planning to say them.

	'What would uncle Reed say to you if he were alive?' I asked.

	'What?' cried Mrs. Reed, her cold grey eyes full of fear, staring at me as if I were a ghost. I had to continue.

	'My uncle Reed is now in heaven, and can see all you think and do, and so can my parents. They know how you hate me, and are cruel to me.'

	Mrs. Reed smacked my face and left me without a word. I was scolded for an hour by Bessie as the most ungrateful child in the world, and indeed with so much hate in my heart I did feel wicked.

	Christmas passed by, with no presents or new clothes for me. Every evening I watched Eliza and Georgiana putting on their new dresses and going out to parties. Sometimes Bessie would come up to me in my lonely bedroom, bringing a piece of cake, sometimes she would tell me a story, and sometimes she would kiss me good night. When she was kind to me I thought she was the best person in the world, but she did not always have time for me.

	On the morning of the fifteenth of January, Bessie rushed up to my room, to tell me a visitor wanted to see me. Who could it be? I knew Mrs. Reed would be there too and I was frightened of seeing her again. When I nervously entered the breakfast-room I looked up at - a black column! At least that is what he looked like to me. He was a tall, thin man dressed all in black, with a cold, stony face at the top of the column.

	'This is the little girl I wrote to you about,' said Mrs. Reed to the stony stranger.

	'Well, Jane Eyre,' said the stranger heavily, 'and are you a good child?'

	It was impossible to say yes, with Mrs. Reed sitting there, so I was silent.

	'Perhaps the less said about that, the better, Mr. Brocklehurst,' said Mrs. Reed, shaking her head.

	'I'm sorry to hear it,' he answered. 'Come here, Jane Eyre, and answer my questions. Where do the wicked go after death?'

	'They go to hell,' I answered.

	'And what must you do to avoid going there?' he asked.

	I thought for a moment, but could not find the right answer.

	'I must keep in good health, and not die,' I replied.

	'Wrong! Children younger than you die all the time. Another question. Do you enjoy reading the

	Bible?'

	'Yes, sometimes,' I replied, hesitating.

	'That is not enough. Your answers show me you have a wicked heart. You must pray to God to change it, if you ever want to go to heaven.'

	'Mr. Brocklehurst,' interrupted Mrs. Reed, 'I mentioned to you in my letter that this little girl has in fact a very bad character. If you accept her at Lowood school, please make sure that the headmistress and teachers know how dishonest she is. She will try to lie to them of course. You see, Jane, you cannot try your tricks on Mr. Brocklehurst.'

	However hard I had tried to please Mrs. Reed in the past, she always thought the worst of me. It was not surprising that I had come to hate her. Now she was accusing me in front of a stranger. My hopes of starting a new life at school began to fade.

	'Do not worry, madam,' Mr. Brocklehurst said, 'the teachers will watch her carefully. Life at Lowood will do her good. We believe in hard work, plain food, simple clothes and no luxury of any kind.'

	'I will send her as soon as possible then, Mr. Brocklehurst. I hope she will be taught according to her low position in life.'

	'Indeed she will, madam. I hope she will be grateful for this opportunity to improve her character. Little girl, read this book. It tells the story of the sudden death of a young girl who was a liar. Read and pray.'

	After Mr. Brocklehurst had given me the book and left, I felt I had to speak. Anger was boiling up inside me. I walked up to Mrs. Reed and looked straight into her eyes.

	'I do not deceive people! If I told lies, I would say I loved you! But I don't, I hate you! I will never call you aunt again as long as I live. If anyone asks how you treated me, I will tell them the truth, that you were very cruel to me. People think you are a good woman, but you are lying to them!'

	Even before I had finished I began to experience a great feeling of freedom and relief. At last I had said what I felt! Mrs. Reed looked frightened and unhappy.

	'Jane, I want to be your friend. You don't know what you're saying. You are too excited. Go to your room and lie down.'

	'I won't lie down. I'm quite calm. Send me to school soon, Mrs. Reed. I hate living here.'

	'I will indeed send her soon,' murmured Mrs. Reed to herself.



	CHAPTER THREE

	My first impressions of school

	Mrs. Reed arranged for me to leave on the nineteenth of January. I had to get up very early to catch the coach, but Bessie helped me to get ready.

	'Will you say goodbye to Mrs. Reed, Jane?' she asked.

	'No, she said, I shouldn't disturb her so early. Anyway, I don't want to say anything to her. She's always hated me.'

	'Oh, Miss Jane, don't say that!'

	'Goodbye to Gateshead!' I shouted wildly, as we walked together out of the front door, to wait for the coach in the road. It arrived, pulled by four horses, and full of passengers. The coachman took my luggage and called me to hurry up. Bessie kissed me for the last time as I held tightly to her.

	She shouted up to the coachman, 'Make sure you take care of her! Fifty miles is a long way for a young child to go alone.'

	'I will!' he answered. The door was closed, and the coach rolled off. What a strange feeling to be leaving Gateshead, my home for the whole of my childhood! Although I was sad to say goodbye to Bessie, I was both excited and nervous about the new places I would see, and the new people I would meet.

	I do not remember much about the journey, except that it seemed far too long. We stopped for lunch, to change the horses. Then in the afternoon I realized we were driving through countryside. I slept for a short time but was woken when the coach stopped. The door opened and a servant called in:

	'Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?'

	'Yes,' I answered, and was helped out of the coach with my luggage. Tired and confused after the journey, I followed the servant into a large building, where she left me in a sitting-room. In came a tall lady, with dark hair and eyes, and a large, pale forehead. I discovered that she was Miss Temple, the headmistress of Lowood school. She looked at me carefully.

	'You are very young to be sent alone. You look tired. Are you?' she asked, putting her hand kindly on my shoulder.

	'A little, ma'am,' I replied. 'How old are you, and what is your name?'

	'I'm Jane Eyre, ma'am, and I'm ten years old.'

	'Well, I hope you will be a good child at school,' she said, touching my cheek gently with her finger.

	I was taken by a teacher, Miss Miller, through the silent corridors of the large school, to the long, wide schoolroom. There about eighty girls, aged from nine to twenty, sat doing their homework. I sat on a bench near the door, with my slate.

	'Put away the lesson-books and fetch the supper-trays!' called Miss Miller. Four tall girls removed all the books, then went out and returned with trays which were handed round. Each child could have a drink of water out of the shared cup, and could take a small piece of biscuit. Then we all went quietly upstairs to the long, crowded bedroom, where two children shared every bed. I had to share Miss Miller's, but I was so tired that I fell asleep immediately.

	In the morning the ringing of a bell woke me, although it was still dark. I got dressed quickly in the bitter cold of the room, and washed when I could. There was only one basin for six girls. When the bell rang again, we all went downstairs, two by two, and silently entered the cold, badly lit schoolroom for prayers. As the bell rang a third time to indicate the beginning of lessons, the girls moved into four groups around four tables, and the teachers came into the room to start the Bible class. I was put in the bottom class. How glad I was when it was time for breakfast! I had hardly eaten anything the day before. But the only food served to us was porridge, which was burnt. It was so disgusting that we could not eat it, so we left the dining-room with empty stomachs. After breakfast came the one happy moment of the day, when the pupils could play and talk freely. We all complained bitterly about the uneatable breakfast. Lessons started again at nine o'clock and finished at twelve, when Miss Temple stood up to speak to the whole school.

	'Girls, this morning you had a breakfast which you couldn't eat. You must be hungry, so I have ordered a lunch of bread and cheese for you all.' The teachers looked at her in surprise.

	'Don't worry, I take responsibility for it,' she told them.

	We were delighted, and all rushed out into the garden to eat our lunch. Nobody had taken any notice of me so far, but I did not mind that. I stood alone outside, watching some of the stronger girls playing, trying to forget the bitter cold, and thinking about my life. Gateshead and the Reed family seemed a long way away. I was not yet used to school life. And what sort of future could I look forward to?

	As I wondered, I saw a girl near me reading a book. I felt brave enough to speak to her, since I too liked reading.

	'Is your book interesting? What is it about?' I asked.

	'Well, I like it,' she said after a pause, looking at me. 'Here, have a look at it.' I glanced quickly at it but found it too difficult to understand, so I gave it back.

	'What sort of school is this?' I asked.

	'It's called Lowood school. It's a charity school. We're all charity children, you see. I expect your parents are dead, aren't they? All the girls here have lost either one or both parents.'

	'Don't we pay anything? Is the school free?' I asked.

	'We pay, or our relations pay, $15 a year for each of us. That isn't enough, so some kind ladies and gentlemen in London pay the rest. That's why it's called a charity school.'

	'Who is Mr. Brocklehurst?' was my next question.

	'His mother built this part of the school. He's the manager, and looks after all financial matters. He lives in a large house near here.'

	I did not see her again until during the afternoon lessons, when I noticed that she had been sent to stand alone in the middle of the schoolroom. I could not imagine what she had done to deserve such a punishment, but she did not look ashamed or unhappy. She was lost in thought, and did not seem to notice that everyone was looking at her.

	'If that happened to me,' I thought, 'I would be so embarrassed!'

	After lessons we had a small cup of coffee and half a piece of brown bread, then half an hour's play, then homework. Finally, after the evening biscuit and drink of water, we said prayers and went to bed. That was my first day at Lowood.



	CHAPTER FOUR

	Making a friend

	The next morning we got up in the dark as before, but the water was frozen, so we could not wash. It was freezing cold in all the rooms. This time the porridge was not burnt, but I still felt hungry, as the quantity was so small.

	I stayed in the bottom class, but noticed the girl that I had been talking to was in another class. Her surname seemed to be Burns. Teachers called girls by their surnames in this school. Her class were studying history, and her teacher, Miss Scatcherd, appeared constantly annoyed by her.

	'Burns, hold your head up, can't you!'

	'Burns, don't stand like that!'

	The history questions asked by Miss Scatcherd sounded very difficult, but Burns knew all the answers. I kept expecting the teacher to praise her, but instead she suddenly cried out:

	'You dirty girl! You haven't washed your hands this morning!'

	I was surprised that Burns did not explain that none of us could wash our faces or hands because the water had been frozen. Miss Scatcherd gave an order. Burns left the room and returned, carrying a stick. The teacher took it and hit Burns several times with it. The girl did not cry or change her expression.

	'Wicked girl!' said Miss Scatcherd. 'Nothing will change your dirty habits!'

	Later that day, during the play-hour, I found Burns alone by the fireside, reading the same book as before, and I started talking to her.

	'What is the rest of your name?' I asked.

	'Helen,' she replied.

	'Do you want to leave Lowood?'

	'No, why should I? I was sent to school here, so I must learn as much as I can.'

	'But Miss Scatcherd is so cruel to you!' I burst out.

	'Cruel? Not at all. She is strict and she sees my faults.'

	'If I were you, I'd hate her,' I cried. 'If she hit me with a stick, I'd seize it and break it under her nose.'

	'I don't think you would,' answered Helen quietly. 'And if you did, Mr Brocklehurst would send you away from school, and your relations would be upset. Anyway, the Bible tells us to do good, even if other people hurt us. Sometimes you have to put up with some hard things in life.'

	I could not understand her ideas, but I had a feeling she might be right. I looked at her in wonder.

	'You say you have faults, Helen. What are they? To me you seem very good.'

	'You are wrong,' she answered. 'I'm untidy and careless and I forget the rules. I read when I should be doing my homework. You see, Miss Scatcherd is right to scold me.'

	'Is Miss Temple as strict as that?' I asked.

	A soft smile passed over Helen's normally serious face.

	'Miss Temple is full of goodness. She gently tells me of my mistakes, and praises me if I do well. But even with her help I don't concentrate properly in class, I just dream away the time, and then I can't answer the teacher's questions.'

	'But today in history you knew all the answers!' I said.

	'I just happened to be interested, that's all,' she replied.

	'I expect you are always interested in Miss Temple's lessons, because you like her and she is good to you. I'm like that. I love those who love me, and I hate those who punish me unfairly.'

	'You should read the Bible and do what Christ says - people who believe in God should love their enemies,' said Helen.

	'Then I should love Mrs. Reed and her son John, which is impossible,' I cried.

	Helen asked me to explain what I meant, and listened carefully to the long story of what I had suffered at Gateshead.

	'Well,' I asked impatiently at the end, 'isn't Mrs. Reed a bad woman? Don't you agree with me?'

	'It's true she has been unkind to you, because she dislikes your faults, as Miss Scatcherd dislikes mine. But look how bitterly you remember every angry word! Wouldn't you be happier if you tried to forget her scolding? Life is too short to continue hating anyone for a long time. We all have faults, but the time will come soon when we die, when our wickedness will pass away with our bodies, leaving only the pure flame of the spirit. That's why I never think of revenge, I never consider life unfair. I live in calm, looking forward to the end.'

	For a moment we both stayed silent. Then one of the big girls came up, calling, 'Helen Burns! Go and put away your work and tidy your drawer immediately, or I'll tell Miss Scatcherd!'

	Helen sighed, and, getting up, silently obeyed.



	CHAPTER FIVE

	Mr. Brocklehurst's visit and its results

	It was difficult for me to get used to the school rules at Lowood, and to the hard physical conditions. In January, February and March there was deep snow, but we still had to spend an hour outside every day. We had no boots or gloves, and my hands and feet ached badly. We were growing children, and needed more food than was provided. Sometimes the big girls bullied us little ones and made us hand over our teatime bread or evening biscuit.

	One afternoon, when I had been at Lowood for three weeks, a visitor arrived. All the teachers and pupils stood respectfully as he entered the schoolroom. I looked up. There, next to Miss Temple, stood the same black column which had frowned on me in the breakfast-room at Gateshead. I had been afraid he would come. I remembered only too well Mrs. Reed's description of my character, and the promise he had given her to warn teachers at Lowood about my wickedness. Now they would consider me a bad child for ever.

	At first Mr. Brocklehurst spoke in a murmur to Miss Temple. I could just hear because I was at the front of the class.

	'Tell the housekeeper she must count the needles, and only give out one at a time to the girls - they lose them so easily! And Miss Temple, please make sure the girls' stockings are mended more carefully. Some of them have a lot of holes.''

	'I shall follow your instructions, sir,' said Miss Temple.

	'And another thing which surprises me, I find that a lunch of bread and cheese has been served to the girls recently. Why is this? There is nothing about it in the rules! Who is responsible?'

	'I myself, sir,' answered Miss Temple. "The breakfast was so badly cooked that the girls couldn't possibly eat it, so they were hungry.'

	'Madam, listen to me for a moment. You know that I am trying to bring up these girls to be strong, patient and unselfish. If some little luxury is not available, do not replace it with something else, but tell them to be brave and suffer, like Christ Himself. Remember what the Bible says, man shall not live by bread alone, but by the word of God! Madam, when you put bread into these children's mouths, you feed their bodies but you starve their souls!'

	Miss Temple did not reply. She looked straight in front of her, and her face was as cold and hard as marble. Mr Brocklehurst, on the other hand, now looked round at the girls, and almost jumped in surprise.

	'Who - what is that girl with red hair, with curls, madam, with curls everywhere?'

	'That is Julia Severn,' said Miss Temple quietly. 'Her hair curls naturally, you see.'

	'Naturally! Yes, but it is God we obey, not nature! Miss Temple, that girl's hair must be cut off. I have said again and again that hair must be arranged modestly and plainly. I see other girls here with too much hair. Yes, I shall send someone tomorrow to cut all the girls' hair.'

	'Mr. Brocklehurst...' began Miss Temple.

	'No, Miss Temple, I insist. To please God these girls must have short, straight hair and plain, simple clothes...'

	He was interrupted by the arrival of three ladies, who had unfortunately not heard his comments on dress and hair. They all wore the most expensive clothes and had beautiful, long, curly hair. I heard Miss Temple greet them as the wife and daughters of Mr. Brocklehurst.

	I had hoped to hide my face behind my slate while Mr. Brocklehurst was talking, so that he would not recognize me, but suddenly the slate fell from my hand and broke in two on the hard floor. I knew only too well what would happen next.

	'A careless girl!' said Mr. Brocklehurst quietly, almost to himself. 'The new girl, I see. I must not forget to say something to the whole school about her.' And then to me, aloud:

	'Come here, child.'

	I was too frightened to move, but two big girls pushed me towards him. Miss Temple whispered kindly in my ear:

	'Don't be afraid, Jane. I saw it was an accident.' Her kindness touched me, but I knew that soon she would hear the lies about me, and then she would hate me!

	'Put the child on that chair,' said Mr. Brocklehurst. Someone lifted me up on to a high chair, so that I was close to his nose. Frightened and shaking, I felt everyone's eyes on me.

	'You see this girl?' began the black marble column. 'She is young, she looks like an ordinary child. Nothing about her tells you she is evil. But she is all wickedness! Children, don't talk to her, stay away from her. Teachers, watch her, punish her body to save her soul - if indeed she has a soul, because this child... I can hardly say it - this child is a liar!'

	 'How shocking!' said the two Brocklehurst daughters, each wiping a tear or two from their eyes.

	'I learned this fact,' continued the great man, 'from Mrs. Reed, the kind lady who took care of her after her parents' death and brought her up as a member of the family. In the end Mrs. Reed was so afraid of this child's evil influence on her own children that she had to send her here. Teachers, watch her carefully!'

	The Brocklehurst family stood up and moved slowly out of the schoolroom. At the door, my judge turned and said, 'She must stand half an hour longer on that chair, and nobody may speak to her for the rest of the day.'

	So there I was, high up on the chair, publicly displayed as an ugly example of evil. Feelings of shame and anger boiled up inside me, but just as I felt I could not bear it any longer, Helen Burns walked past me and lifted her eyes to mine. Her look calmed me. What a smile she had! It was an intelligent, brave smile, lighting up her thin face and her tired grey eyes.

	When all the girls left the schoolroom at five o'clock, I climbed down from the chair and sat on the floor. I no longer felt strong or calm, and I began to cry bitterly. I had wanted so much to make friends at Lowood, to be good, to deserve praise. Now nobody would believe me or perhaps even speak to me. Could I ever start a new life after this?

	'Never!' I cried. 'I wish I were dead!' Just then Helen arrived, bringing my coffee and bread. I was too upset to eat or drink, but she sat with me for some time, talking gently to me, wiping away my tears, and helping me to recover. When Miss Temple came to look for me, she found us sitting quietly together.

	'Come up to my room, both of you,' she said.

	We went to her warm, comfortable room upstairs.

	'Now tell me the truth, Jane,' she said. 'You have been accused, and you must have the chance to defend yourself.'

	And so I told her the whole story of my lonely childhood with the Reed family, and of my terrible experience in the red room.

	'I know Dr Lloyd, who saw you when you were ill,' she said. 'I'll write to him and see if he agrees with what you say. If he does, I shall publicly tell the school you are not a liar. I believe you now, Jane.' And she kissed me. She turned to Helen.

	'How are you tonight, Helen? Have you coughed a lot today?'

	'Not very much, ma'am.'

	'And the pain in your chest?'

	'It's a little better, I think.'

	Miss Temple examined Helen carefully, and sighed a little. Then she gave us some tea and toast. For a while I felt I was in heaven, eating and drinking in the warm, pretty room, with kind Miss Temple and Helen.

	But when we reached our bedroom, Miss Scatcherd was checking the drawers.

	'Burns!' she said. 'Yours is far too untidy! Tomorrow, all day, you will wear a notice on your forehead saying UNTIDY!'

	Helen said Miss Scatcherd was quite right, and wore the notice all the next day. But I was furious, and at the end of the afternoon, tore it off her head and threw it in the fire.

	When Miss Temple received a letter from Dr Lloyd, agreeing that what I had said was true, she told the whole school that I had been wrongly accused and was not a liar. From that moment, I felt I was accepted, and set to work to learn as much as I could, and make as many friends as possible.



	CHAPTER SIX

	Learning to like school

	Life at Lowood no longer seemed so hard, as spring approached. We enjoyed walking and playing in the surrounding countryside. But, with fog lying constantly in the valley, it was not a healthy place for a school, and by May more than half the girls were seriously ill with typhus fever. As a result of poor food and bad living conditions, many girls died.

	While there was fear and death inside the school, the sun shone on the flowers outside, and on the flowing streams in the valleys. So I and the few who had escaped illness enjoyed the beautiful summer weather, with no lessons or discipline at all.

	Helen Burns could not come walking with me, because she was ill, not with typhus but with tuberculosis. At first I had thought she would recover, but when I learned her illness was serious, I decided to visit her at night, for what might be the last time. I found her lying in bed, looking pale and weak.

	'You've come to say goodbye,' she whispered, coughing. 'You are just in time. I'm going soon.'

	'Where, Helen? Are you going home?' I asked.

	'Yes, to my long home - my last home.'

	'No, no, Helen!' I was crying at the thought of losing her.

	'Jane, your feet are cold. Lie down with me and cover them with my blanket.' I did so. 'I am happy, Jane,' she continued. 'You mustn't cry. By dying young, I'll avoid suffering. I am going to heaven.'

	'Does heaven really exist?' I asked.

	'Yes, I'm sure of it. I'm sure our souls go there when we die,' she answered firmly. 'Will I see you again, Helen, when I die?'

	'Yes, you will go to heaven too, Jane.'

	I could not quite believe that heaven existed, and I held tightly to Helen. I did not want to let her go. We kissed goodnight and fell asleep. In the morning Miss Temple found me asleep, with Helen Burns dead in my arms. She was buried in the local churchyard.

	Gradually the typhus fever left Lowood, but the number of deaths made the public aware of the poor conditions in which the pupils lived. Money was raised to build a new school in a better position, many improvements were made, and Mr. Brocklehurst lost his position as manager. So it became a really useful place of education. I stayed for eight more years, for the last two as a teacher. I was busy and happy all that time, relying greatly on the help and encouragement of my dear friend Miss Temple.

	But when she married and moved to a distant part of the country, I decided it was the moment for me to change my life too. I realized I had never known any other world apart from Lowood or Gateshead. Suddenly I wanted freedom or at least a new master to serve. So I advertised in a newspaper for a job as a governess. When I received an answer from a Mrs. Fairfax, who wanted a governess for a girl under ten years old, I accepted, with the permission of the new headmistress of Lowood.



	CHAPTER SEVEN

	Thornfield and Mr. Rochester



	Thornfield Hall was a large gentleman's house in the country, near a town called Millcote. There, after my sixteen-hour journey, I was welcomed by Mrs. Fairfax. She was a little old lady, dressed in black, who seemed glad to have someone else to talk to, apart from the servants. Although the house was dark and frightening, with its big rooms full of heavy furniture, I was excited at being in a new place, and looked forward to my new life there, working for kind Mrs. Fairfax.

	But I was surprised to discover on my first full day at Thornfield that Mrs. Fairfax was not in fact the owner, as I had assumed, but the housekeeper, and that my new master was a Mr. Rochester, who was often away from home. My pupil was a girl called Adele, seven or eight years old, who was born in France and could hardly speak English. Luckily I had learnt French very well at Lowood, and had no difficulty in communicating with young Adele, a pretty, cheerful child. It appeared that Mr. Rochester, who had known Adele and her mother very well, had brought Adele back to England to live with him after her mother had died. I taught her for several hours every day in the library, although it was not easy to make her concentrate on anything for long, as she was clearly not used to the discipline of lessons.

	One day I took the opportunity of asking Mrs. Fairfax a few questions about Mr. Rochester, as I was curious about him, and the little housekeeper seemed happy to talk.

	'Is he liked by most people?' was my first question. 'Oh yes, his family have always been respected here. They've owned the land round here for years,' she replied.

	'But do you like him? What is his character like?'

	'I have always liked him, and I think he's a fair master to his servants. He's a little peculiar, perhaps. He's travelled a lot, you know. I expect he's clever, but I can't tell, really.'

	'What do you mean, peculiar?' I asked, interested.

	'It's not easy to describe. You're never sure whether he's serious or joking. You don't really understand him, at least I don't. But that doesn't matter, he's a very good master.'

	I could get no further information from Mrs. Fairfax about Mr. Rochester, but instead she offered to show me round the whole house. We went through many large, impressive rooms, finally reaching the top floor, where there was a narrow corridor with several small black doors, all shut. I stopped to look at them, and thought for a moment they looked like prison doors, hiding evil secrets. No sooner had I turned away to go downstairs than I heard a strange, ghostly laugh.

	'Mrs. Fairfax!' I called out, as the housekeeper was already on her way downstairs. 'Did you hear that laugh? Who is it?'

	'It may be Grace Poole,' she answered calmly. 'She is paid to help the housemaid in her work, and always sews in one of those rooms.' I heard the laugh again. It did not sound human to me.

	'Grace!' called Mrs. Fairfax. I did not expect anyone to answer, but in fact a door opened and a middle-aged woman appeared. She looked too plain and sensible to be a ghost.

	'Too much noise, Grace,' said Mrs. Fairfax. 'Remember your instructions!' Grace nodded and went back into the room.

	Several times in the next few months I went up to the top floor again, where I could look out of the high windows in the roof to see the surrounding countryside and be alone with my thoughts. I was very happy teaching pretty little Adele in the daytime, and talking to kind old Mrs. Fairfax in the evening, but I felt that something was missing from my life. I had dreams of a greater and better life, and above all, I wanted to do more. People are not always satisfied with a quiet life, and women as well as men need action.

	While on the top floor I often heard Grace Poole's strange laugh, and sometimes I saw her too. She used to go silently in and out of the room with a plate of food or a glass of beer.

	One day in January I had a free afternoon, as Adele was ill, so I decided to walk to Hay, a village two miles away, to post a letter for the housekeeper. It was a bright, frosty day, and I was enjoying the fresh air and the exercise. Stopping on the lonely road, I watched the sun go down in the trees behind Thornfield, and then in the silence I heard a horse approaching. Suddenly there was a crash as the horse slipped and fell on the ice, bringing down its rider. I ran to see if I could help the traveller, who was swearing furiously as he pulled himself free of his horse.

	'Are you hurt, sir? Can I do anything?' I asked.

	'Just stand back,' he growled, as he lifted himself painfully to his feet. Obviously his leg hurt him, and he sat down quickly.

	'If you need help, sir, I can fetch someone either from Thornfield Hall or from Hay,' I offered.

	'Thank you, but I don't need anyone. I haven't broken any bones,' he replied crossly. I could see him clearly in the moonlight. He was of medium height, with wide shoulders and a strong chest. He had a dark face, with angry-looking eyes, and was about thirty-five. If he had been a young, attractive gentleman, I would have been too shy to offer help, but as he was not handsome, and even quite rough, I felt I wanted to help him.

	'I can't leave you, sir, so late on this lonely road, till I see you are fit enough to get on your horse,' I insisted.

	He looked at me for the first time when I said this.

	'I think you ought to be at home yourself,' he answered. 'Do you live near here?'

	'In that house over there,' I said, 'and I'm not at all afraid of being out at night. I'm just going to Hay to post a letter, and I'll be happy to take a message for you.'

	'You live in... in that house?' he asked, surprised, pointing to Thornfield Hall, which was lit up in the moonlight. 'Yes, sir,' I replied. 'Whose house is it?' he asked. 'Mr. Rochester's.'

	'Do you know Mr. Rochester?' was his next question. 'No, I've never seen him,' I answered.

	'You aren't a servant at Thornfield Hall, of course. You must be...'he hesitated, looking at my plain black dress. He seemed puzzled to know who I was, so I helped him. 'I am the governess.'

	'Ah, the governess! I had forgotten?' He tried to get up but his leg was still hurting him badly. 'I don't want you to fetch help, but you could help me yourself, if you like.'

	'Of course, sir,' I said. And so he leaned his weight on my shoulder and I helped him walk to his horse. In a moment he had jumped on to the horse's back. 'Thank you, now take your letter to Hay, then hurry home!' he called as he rode off into the distance. I walked on, glad to have helped someone, to have done something active for once. In my mind I saw that dark, strong face, and I still felt excited by our meeting. Even when I arrived back at Thornfield, I did not go in for a while. I did not want to go into the dark house, where I would spend the evening quietly with old Mrs Fairfax. So I stayed outside, staring up at the moon and the stars with a beating heart, wishing and dreaming of a different, more exciting life.

	When I entered, the servants told me that Mr. Rochester had arrived, and that he had hurt his leg when his horse slipped on ice on the road to Hay.



	CHAPTER EIGHT

	Getting to Know Mr. Rochester

	Thornfield Hall became quite busy the next day, now that the master had returned. People kept coming to visit him on business. I enjoyed the new, cheerful atmosphere. But I could not make Adele concentrate on her lessons because she was constantly talking about the presents Mr. Rochester had promised to bring her. That evening we were invited to have tea with him. I immediately recognized the traveller I had helped, with his dark hair and skin, his square forehead and his stern look. His leg was supported on a chair, but he made no effort to greet me when I entered. In fact, he neither spoke nor moved.

	'Have you brought a present for Miss Eyre with you as well?' Adele asked him.

	'A present? Who wants a present?' he said angrily. 'Did you expect a present, Miss Eyre? Do you like presents?'

	'I haven't much experience of them, sir,' I answered. 'Anyway, I have no right to expect a present, as I haven't done anything to deserve one.'

	'Don't be so modest! I've been talking to Adele. She's not very clever, but you've taught her well.'

	'Sir, that is my present. That's what a teacher wants most, praise of her pupil's progress.'

	Mr. Rochester drank his tea in silence. After tea, he called me closer to the fire, while Adele played with Mrs. Fairfax.

	'Where were you before you came here?' he asked.

	'I was at Lowood school, sir, for eight years.'

	'Ah, yes, a charity school! Eight years! I'm surprised you lasted so long in such a place. There is something like magic in your face. When I met you on the road to Hay last night, I almost thought you had put a spell on my horse! I still wonder if you did. What about your parents?'

	'They're dead. I don't remember them.'

	'And your relations?'

	'I have none.'

	'Who recommended you to come here?'

	'I advertised, and Mrs. Fairfax answered the advertisement.'

	'Yes,' said the old housekeeper, 'and I thank God she did. She's a good teacher for Adele, and a kind friend to me.'

	'Don't try to give her a good character, Mrs. Fairfax,' said Mr. Rochester sternly. 'She and her magic made my horse slip on the ice last night.'

	Mrs. Fairfax looked puzzled and clearly did not understand. 'Miss Eyre,' continued Mr. Rochester, 'how old were you when you started at Lowood?'

	'About ten.'

	'And you stayed there eight years, so you are now eighteen?' I nodded. 'I would never have been able to guess your age,' he went on. 'Now, what did you learn there? Can you play the piano? 'A little.'

	'Of course, that's what all young women say. Go and play a tune on the piano in the library.' I did as he asked.

	'That's enough!' he called after a few minutes. 'Yes, you do indeed play a little, just like any schoolgirl, better than some perhaps. Now, bring me your sketches.' I fetched them from my room. Having looked carefully at them, he chose three.

	'These are interesting,' he said. 'You have only expressed the shadow of your ideas, because you aren't good enough at drawing or painting, but the ideas, where did they come from? Who taught you to draw wind, and space, and feeling? But put them away now, Miss Eyre. Do you realize it's nine o'clock? Adele should be in bed by now. Good night to you all.' Mr. Rochester's mood had suddenly changed, and he clearly wished to be alone.

	Later that evening I talked to Mrs. Fairfax.

	'You said Mr. Rochester was a little peculiar,' I said.

	'Well, what do you think, Miss Eyre?'

	'I think he is very peculiar, and quite rude.'

	'He may seem like that to a stranger. I'm so used to him that I never notice it. And he has had family troubles, you know.'

	'But he has no family,' I answered.

	'Not now, that's true, but he did have an older brother, who died nine years ago.'

	'Nine years is a long time. Surely he has recovered from losing his brother by now.'

	'Well, there was a lot of bad feeling in the family. The father was very fond of money, and wanted to keep the family property together, so the elder brother inherited most of it. I don't know what happened, but I do know Mr. Edward (that's the master) quarrelled with his family. That's why he's travelled so much. When his brother died, he inherited Thornfield, but I'm not surprised he doesn't come here often.'

	'Why should he stay away?' I asked, surprised.

	'Perhaps he thinks it's a sad place. I really don't know.' It was clear that Mrs. Fairfax would not tell me any more.

	One evening, a few days later, I was invited to talk to Mr. Rochester after dinner. At the far end of the room Adele was delightedly telling Mrs. Fairfax about the presents she had received. Mr. Rochester called me closer to the fire.

	'I don't like the conversation of children or old ladies,' he murmured to me. 'But they are entertaining each other at the moment, so I can amuse myself.' Tonight he did not look so stern, and there was a softness in his fine, dark eyes. As I was looking at him, he suddenly turned and caught my look.

	'Do you think I'm handsome, Miss Eyre?' he asked.

	Normally I would have taken time to think, and said something polite, but somehow I answered at once, 'No, sir.'

	'Ah, you really are unusual! You are a quiet, serious little person, but you can be almost rude.'

	'Sir, I'm sorry. I should have said that beauty doesn't matter, or something like that.'

	'No, you shouldn't! I see, you criticize my appearance, and then you stab me in the back! All right, tell me. What is wrong with my appearance?'

	'Mr. Rochester, I didn't intend to criticize you.'

	'Well, now you can. Look at my head. Do you think I am intelligent?' He pointed to his huge, square forehead.

	'I do, sir. Is it rude to ask if you are also good?'

	'Stabbing me again! Just because I said I didn't like talking to old ladies and children! Well, young lady, I wanted to be good when I was younger, but life has been a struggle for me, and I've become as hard and tough as a rubber ball. I only have a little goodness left inside.' He was speaking rather excitedly, and I thought perhaps he had been drinking. 'Miss Eyre, you look puzzled. Tonight I want conversation. It's your turn. Speak.'

	I said nothing, but smiled coldly.

	'I'm sorry if I'm rude, Miss Eyre. But I'm twenty years older, and more experienced, than you. Don't you think I have the right to command you?'

	'No, sir, not just because you're older and more experienced than me. You would have the right only if you'd made good use of your experience of life.'

	'I don't accept that, as I've made very bad use of my experience! But will you agree to obey my orders anyway?'

	I thought, 'He is peculiar, he's forgotten that he's paying me $30 a year to obey his orders,' and I said, 'Not many masters bother to ask if their servants are offended by their orders:

	'Of course! I'd forgotten that I pay you a salary! So will you agree because of the salary?'

	'No, sir, not because of that, but because you forgot about it, and because you care whether a servant of yours is comfortable or not, I gladly agree.'

	'You have honesty and feeling. There are not many girls like you. But perhaps I go too fast. Perhaps you have awful faults to counterbalance your few good points.'

	'And perhaps you have too,' I thought.

	He seemed to read my mind, and said quickly, 'Yes, you're right. I have plenty of faults. I went the wrong way when I was twenty-one, and have never found the right path again. I might have been very different. I might have been as good as you, and perhaps wiser. I am not a bad man, take my word for it, but I have done wrong. It wasn't my character, but circumstances which were to blame. Why do I tell you all this? Because you're the sort of person people tell their problems and secrets to, because you're sympathetic and give them hope.'

	'Do you think so, sir?'

	'I do. You see, when life was difficult, I became desperate, and now all I have is regret.'

	'Asking forgiveness might cure it, sir.'

	'No, it won't. What I really should do is change my character, and I still could but - it's difficult. And if I can't have happiness, I want pleasure, even if it's wrong.'

	'Pleasure may taste bitter, sir.'

	'How do you know, a pure young thing like you? You have no experience of life and its problems. But I will try to lead a better life.'

	I stood up. The conversation was becoming hard to follow.

	'I must put Adele to bed now,' I said.

	'Don't be afraid of me, Miss Eyre. You don't relax or laugh very much, perhaps because of the effect Lowood school has had on you. But in time you will be more natural with me, and laugh, and speak freely. You're like a restless bird in a cage. When you get out of the cage, you'll fly very high. Good night.'



	CHAPTER NINE

	Mr. Rochester's past

	Soon I discovered what Mr. Rochester meant when he said he had done wrong. One afternoon, while walking in the gardens of Thornfield, he told me the story of his love-affair in Paris with a French dancer, Celine.

	'Yes, Miss Eyre, I was young and foolish then. I was so in love with her that I rented a house and hired servants for her. I gave her a carriage and jewels, in fact I threw away a fortune on her, just like any fool in love. One evening I visited her but found she was out, so I waited on her balcony, smoking a cigar. I heard her carriage arriving. Imagine my horror at seeing her step out followed by a man! You're so young, you've never felt love or jealousy, have you, Miss Eyre? You are floating along a quiet river now, you don't see the water boiling at the foot of the great rocks, but one day you'll come to a point in life's stream where the wild force of the waves may destroy you, where the noisy rushing water may drown you! I am calm enough now, calm enough to like living here at Thornfield. I like it because it's old, and grey, and dark, and yet I hate - ' He did not finish what he was saying, staring angrily up at the windows on the top floor of his house. It was a look of disgust, pain and shame. I could not understand what he meant, and wanted to hear more about Celine, so I encouraged him to finish the story.

	'What happened when she entered the house, sir?'

	'Oh, I'd forgotten Celine! By the way, it's strange my telling you all this, but I know my secret's safe with you, and I know, too, that it can't have an evil influence on you - your mind's too strong for that. Yes, I listened to her conversation with her lover, an elegant young fool, and I knew I was no longer in love with her. So I walked into the room, told her our relationship was over, and challenged her lover to fight me. Next day I shot him in the arm during our fight, thought that was the end of the whole thing, and left France. But a few months before, Celine had had a baby girl, Adele, and she claimed that Adele was my child. She may be, although I doubt it. So when, a few years later, Celine abandoned Adele and ran away to Italy with a singer, I went to Paris and brought Adele back to grow up in England.'

	I felt proud that Mr. Rochester had trusted me with the story of his past life. I thought a lot about his character, and although I was aware of his faults, I also saw his goodness and kindness to me. From now on, my happiest moments were spent with him. I could not have imagined a better companion.

	One night I was woken by a slight noise. I felt sure someone was outside my bedroom door. As I hurried to lock it, I called, 'Who's there?' There was a strange, inhuman sound, then I heard a door shut upstairs on the top floor. 'Was that Grace Poole?' I wondered, trembling. My curiosity made me open the door, and I found the corridor full of smoke. I saw it was coming from Mr. Rochester's door, which was slightly open. I completely forgot my fears and rushed into his room. He lay fast asleep, surrounded by flames and smoke. Even his sheets were on fire.

	'Wake up! Wake up!' I shouted desperately, throwing water over him to put out the flames. Not until the fire was almost out did he wake up, swearing to find himself so wet.

	'Is there a flood?' he cried. 'No, sir,' I answered, 'but there's been a fire.'

	'Jane Eyre, is it you and your magic?' he asked. 'Have you put a spell on me again? Did you intend to drown me this time?'

	'Please get up, sir. Someone has plotted to kill you!' and I explained what I had heard and how I had put out the fire. He looked very serious, and thought for a few seconds.

	'Shall I fetch Mrs. Fairfax, sir, or the servants?' I asked. 'No, why bother them? Just stay here for a moment. I'm going up to the top floor. Don't call anyone. I'll be back soon.'

	I waited, cold and tired, in his room for what seemed a very long time. Then I saw the light of his candle approaching through the darkness, and he appeared, looking pale and depressed.

	'Did you see anything when you opened your bedroom door?' he asked, glancing sharply at me.

	'No, sir, only a candle on the floor.'

	'But you heard a strange laugh, did you say?'

	'Yes, I've heard it before. Grace Poole laughs like that.'

	'That's it. It must have been Grace Poole. You've guessed it. I shall consider what to do about it. But meanwhile I'm glad you're the only person who knows anything about all this. Say nothing to anybody else, and now, go back to your own room.'

	'Good night, then, sir,' I said, moving towards the door. 'What! Are you leaving me already!?' he said, seeming surprised, although he had just told me to go, 'and so coldly?'

	'You said I should go, sir.'

	'But not without saying goodbye, not without a kind word or two. Why, you've saved my life. I hate being in debt to anyone, but with you it's different, Jane. I'm happy to owe you my life.' His voice was trembling as he took both my hands in his. 'I knew, when I first saw you, that you would do me good. I saw it in your eyes when I met you. I was right to like your smile and the magic in your face.' There was energy in his voice and a strange light in his eyes.

	'I'm glad I happened to be awake,' I said, 'but I must go now. I'm cold.' I knew I could not control my feelings much longer, and I needed time to think. But he still held on to my hands. Then I thought of a way of escaping.

	'I think I hear the servants moving, sir,' I said.

	'Well, leave me,' he said, and let me go. That night, or what was left of it, I could not sleep. My mind was full of confusing pictures and disturbed emotions.



	CHAPTER TEN

	The mystery of Grace Poole

	After this sleepless night I was eager to see Mr. Rochester in the morning, but there was no sign of him. He had obviously told the servants that he had accidentally set fire to his room by knocking over a lighted candle. As I passed his bedroom, I saw Grace Poole sitting inside, calmly mending the curtains. She certainly did not look desperate or mad enough to have tried to murder her master. But I decided to investigate.

	'Good morning, Grace,' I said, entering the room. 'Tell me, what happened last night? The servants are talking about it.'

	'Good morning, miss,' she replied, looking up innocently. 'Well, master was reading in bed and fell asleep, so he must have knocked the candle over. It set fire to the sheets, but luckily he managed to put the flames out with some water.'

	'How strange!' I said quietly. 'Didn't anybody hear what was happening?' At this, she seemed to examine me carefully.

	'Mrs. Fairfax and you sleep nearest this room, miss. Mrs. Fairfax is a heavy sleeper, like most old people, and didn't hear anything. But you're young, miss. Perhaps you heard a noise?'

	'I did,' I whispered. 'I'm sure I heard a strange laugh.'

	She went on sewing calmly.

	'I don't think master would have laughed, when he was in such danger,' she said. 'You must have been dreaming.'

	'No, I wasn't dreaming,' I replied sharply.

	'You didn't think of opening your door and looking out into the corridor?' she asked. I suddenly realized that if she suspected I knew of her guilt, she might attack me.

	'No, in fact I locked my door,' I answered, 'and I shall lock it every night from now on.'

	'That's wise of you, miss. We might have burglars at Thornfield one day, you never know.'

	I was amazed by her self-control, and could not understand why Mr. Rochester had not asked the police to arrest her, or at least dismissed her from his service. Why had he asked me to keep the attack a secret? How could such a proud gentleman be so much in the power of one of his servants that he could not even punish her for trying to kill him? Did she know a terrible secret from his past, which she had threatened to tell? Could he ever have been in love with her? 'No,' I thought, 'he could never love anyone as plain and coarse as she is. But then, I'm not beautiful either, and I sometimes think he loves me. Last night - his words, his look, his voice!' And my cheeks were red as I thought of those precious moments.

	I was now even more impatient to see Mr. Rochester, but when I was having tea with Mrs. Fairfax in the afternoon, the first thing she said was, 'It's fine weather for the master's journey.'

	'Journey!' I cried. 'I didn't know he'd gone anywhere!'

	'Oh yes, he went off just after breakfast, to visit a family in a big house about sixteen miles away. I know they've invited a lot of guests, who'll be staying in the house. Mr. Rochester is always very popular with the ladies at these parties, so he may not come back for a week or so.'

	'Who are the ladies at this house-party?'

	'Three sisters, very elegant young ladies, and their friends, Blanche and Mary Ingram. But Blanche is the most beautiful of all. I saw her when she came to a Christmas party at Thornfield, six or seven years ago.'

	'What does she look like?'

	'She was eighteen then, a lovely girl, with beautiful skin, long curling black hair, and fine black eyes which shone as brightly as her jewels. She looked like a queen. All the gentlemen admired her, not only for her beauty but also for her musical skills. When she and Mr. Rochester sang together, it was a delight to hear.'

	'Mr. Rochester? I didn't know he could sing.'

	'Oh yes, he has a very fine voice. And then she played the piano later. The master said she played extremely well.'

	'And this beautiful lady isn't married yet?'

	'No, I don't think she or her sister has much money.'

	'But I'm surprised some rich gentleman hasn't fallen in love with her. Mr. Rochester, for example. He's rich, isn't he?'

	'Oh yes. But you see, there's a considerable difference in age. He's nearly forty, and she's only twenty-five.'

	'Well, marriages like that happen every day. Do you think -' But I was interrupted by Adele, who came to join us, and the subject was changed.

	That night in my room I was stern with myself.

	'You, Jane Eyre,' I accused my reflection in the mirror, 'you are the biggest fool in the world! How could you imagine that a gentleman of family and wealth would love you, a plain little governess! Just look at yourself!' And I decided that next day I would draw an honest sketch of myself, and then one of Blanche Ingram, painting the most lovely face I could imagine, according to Mrs. Fairfax's description. In the future, if ever my old feelings about Mr. Rochester began to return, I would only have to glance at the two pictures to see the great difference between us, and in this way common sense would destroy my foolish dreams.



	CHAPTER ELEVEN

	The Thornfield house-party

	Two disappointing weeks passed before we heard from Mr. Rochester again. During this time I tried hard to forget my feeling for him. I reminded myself that he paid me to teach Adele, nothing more, and that no other relationship could exist between us. When his letter finally came, Mrs. Fairfax announced with great excitement that he was planning a house-party at Thornfield. He was going to return in three days' time, and had invited a large number of ladies and gentlemen to stay for several days. We all worked extremely hard in the next few days, cleaning all the rooms and preparing the food.

	The only person in the house who did not appear excited was Grace Poole, who stayed in her room upstairs, coming down once a day for food and drink. None of the servants seemed at all curious about her, but I once heard two of the maids talking, and I listened when I caught her name.

	'Does Grace Poole earn a lot, then?' asked one.

	'Oh yes, five times what you and I earn!' answered the other.

	'But she's good at the work, I expect,' said the first.

	'Ah! She understands what she has to do, that's true,' answered the second, 'and not everyone would want to do her job, not even for all that money!'

	'Quite right! I wonder whether the master-' Suddenly they saw me and broke off their conversation.

	'Doesn't she know?' I heard one of them whisper,

	'No,' said the other, and they were silent. So I realized there was a secret at Thornfield, which nobody wanted to tell me.

	At last the great day came. Everything was ready for the master and his guests. Adele and I watched from an upstairs window as the carriages arrived. In front rode Mr. Rochester on his black horse, and with him rode a beautiful lady, her black curls streaming in the wind. 'Blanche Ingram!' I thought. We listened to the laughing and talking in the hall, as the guests were welcomed by their host and his housekeeper. From a dark corner of the stairs we admired the ladies as they went up to their rooms, and then again as they descended to dinner in their elegant evening dresses. Adele was hoping Mr. Rochester would call her down to meet the guests, but in the end she was so tired with all the excitement that she and I both went to bed early.

	Next morning after breakfast the whole group went out for the day. Again I saw Mr. Rochester and Blanche Ingram riding together. I pointed this out to Mrs. Fairfax.

	'You see, Mr. Rochester clearly prefers her to any of the other ladies.'

	'Yes, he does seem to admire her,' admitted the housekeeper.

	'And she admires him. Notice how she looks at him! But I haven't really seen her face yet. I'd like to.'

	'You'll see her tonight,' answered Mrs. Fairfax. 'I mentioned to the master that Adele wanted to be introduced to the ladies, and he asked you to bring her down to meet them this evening.'

	'Well, I'll go if he wants me to, but I don't like meeting strangers. I'm not used to it.'

	'I understand how you feel,' said the old lady kindly, 'but the guests won't notice you much, and you can easily escape after a short time.'

	So Adele and I, dressed in our best, were waiting as the ladies came into the sitting-room after dinner. I was most impressed by the beauty and elegance of all of them, but was especially fascinated by the Ingram family. Lady Ingram, although between forty and fifty, was still a fine woman. Her hair still looked black, by candle light at least, and her teeth still seemed perfect. But she had fierce, proud eyes, that reminded me of aunt Reed's, and a hard, powerful voice. Her daughter Mary was rather quiet, but her other daughter Blanche was very different. As soon as the gentlemen came into the room and coffee was served, she became the centre of attention. She played the piano excellently, she sang sweetly, she discussed intelligently, and all the time her flashing eyes, rich black curls and fine figure attracted glances from every gentleman in the room.

	But I was looking for someone else. The last time I had seen him, on the night of the fire, he had held my hands, told me I had saved his life, and looked at me as if he loved me. How close we had been then! But now, he entered the room without even looking at me, and took a seat with the ladies. I could not stop looking at him, rather like a thirsty man who knows the water is poisoned but cannot resist drinking. I had never intended to love him. I had tried hard to destroy all feelings of love for him, but now that I saw him again, I could not stop myself loving him. I compared him to the other gentlemen present. They were all fine, handsome men, but they did not have his power, his character, his strength, or indeed his deep laugh or his gentle smile. I felt that he and I were the same sort of person, that there was something in my brain and heart, in my blood and bone, that connected me to him for ever. And although I knew I must hide my feelings, must never allow myself to hope, I also knew that while there was breath in my body, I would always love him.

	Just then I heard Blanche Ingram say to him,

	'Mr. Rochester, you should have sent that little girl - Adele, is that her name? - to school, but I see you have a governess for her. I saw a strange little person with her just now. Has she gone? Oh no, there she is on the window-seat. It's very foolish of you, you know. Governesses aren't worth their salary, are they, Mamma?'

	'My dear, don't mention governesses to me!' cried Lady Ingram, holding a white hand to her forehead. 'How I have suffered with them!' One of the older ladies whispered to her, pointing in my direction.

	'Oh, I don't care if she hears me!' said Lady Ingram. 'All governesses are useless. They never teach children anything.'

	'What fun we used to have, playing tricks on them, didn't we, Mary?' laughed Blanche. 'But governesses are boring. Let's change the subject. Mr. Rochester, will you sing with me?'

	'With pleasure,' he answered, bowing, and the group moved towards the piano. This was the moment for me to escape, but I had only just left the sitting-room and reached the hall, when Mr. Rochester appeared through another door.

	'Come back, you're leaving too early,' he said to me.

	'I'm tired, sir.' He looked at me for a minute.

	'And a little depressed. Why? Tell me.'

	'Nothing - it's nothing, sir. I'm not depressed.'

	'But I think you are. You're almost crying. But I haven't got time now to discover the reason. Well, tonight you may leave early, but I want to see you with my guests every evening. Good night, my-' He stopped, bit his lip, and turned quickly away.

	Those were cheerful, busy days at Thornfield. The old house had never seen so much life and activity. When it was fine the host and his guests went riding, visited places of interest, and walked in the gardens, and when it was wet they played games indoors. Mr. Rochester and Blanche Ingram were always together. Observing them closely, I felt very sure that he would soon marry this fine lady. But I did not feel jealous, because I knew he did not love her. She had made every effort to attract him, but he had not given her his heart. I saw her faults very clearly. She was intelligent but had no opinions of her own. She was beautiful but not good. She spoke of feelings but she knew nothing of sympathy or pity. And above all she had her mother's pride and hardness. Other eyes apart from mine saw all these faults. Mr. Rochester himself knew she was not perfect, but he was clearly preparing to marry her, perhaps because she was of good family, perhaps for some other reason.

	One day when Mr. Rochester was out alone on business, a stranger arrived in a carriage, and introduced himself as an old friend of the master's. His name was Mason, and he had just returned from the West Indies, where Mr. Rochester had once lived.



	CHAPTER TWELVE

	The gipsy woman

	No sooner had Mr. Mason joined the group of guests than a servant entered to announce the arrival of an old gipsy woman, who was supposed to be a skilled fortune-teller. The ladies were very excited and decided to ask her to tell their fortunes. Miss Ingram, as usual, was first, and spent fifteen minutes alone with the old woman in the library. She came back looking cross.

	'It's just childish nonsense! How can you all believe in that sort of thing!' she said, picking up a book and pretending to read it. But as she frowned more and more, and did not turn a page, I assumed that the gipsy's words were more important to her than she wanted us to think. Next, three young ladies went in together, and came back full of praise for the gipsy's skill. 'She's old, and dirty, and ugly!' they cried, shocked, 'but she knows everything about us, everything!'

	While the gentlemen were calming them down, the servant entered the room again.

	'Excuse me, miss,' he said to me. The gipsy says there's another young single lady in the room. She refuses to leave the house until she has seen all the young ladies. It must be you.'

	'Oh, I'll go,' I said gladly. I was curious to see the gipsy.

	She was sitting in an armchair in the library, murmuring words over a little black book. Her large black hat covered most of her face, but when she lifted her head, I saw her dark eyes.

	'So you want me to tell your fortune?' she asked.

	'Well, I must warn you, I don't believe in your skill.'

	'I expected that. Why don't you tremble?'

	'I'm not cold.'

	'Why don't you turn pale?'

	'I'm not ill.'

	'Why don't you ask me to tell your fortune?'

	'I'm not a fool.'

	The old woman laughed and started smoking a short black pipe.

	'I can prove that you're cold, and ill, and a fool,' she said. 'Listen. You're cold, because you're alone. You're ill, because you lack love. And you're a fool, because love is near you, and you won't take one step to reach it.'

	'That's true of many people,' I said, interested.

	'Yes, but especially true of you. I can see that happiness is waiting for you, if you really want it. Tell me, in that room of fine people, isn't there one face you look at, one person you're interested in?'

	'I hardly know the ladies and gentlemen here,' I answered.

	'Well, you surely know the master of the house? What do you think of his relationship with his guests, and with one particular guest?' asked the gipsy, smiling wickedly.

	'They're all very friendly with each other,' I replied cautiously. The gipsy seemed to know a lot about Thornfield.

	'Friendly! I'd say more than that, in fact I'd go so far as to mention the name of Blanche Ingram and the word, marriage. They will obviously be an extremely happy couple, although I told Miss Ingram something about the Rochester property which made her look quite depressed. If a wealthier gentleman comes along, Mr. Rochester might lose his beautiful bride...'

	'But I came to hear about my future, not Mr. Rochester's!'

	'It depends on whether you're going to stretch out your hand for happiness. Let me look at your face. Your eyes and your mouth show me that feelings are important to you, but your forehead shows me that common sense is your main guide in life. You will never do anything wrong or shameful. Well, I respect that. I don't want sacrifice or sorrow in my life. I want - but that will do. I'd like to stay here looking at you for ever, but I must stop acting now.'

	Was I dreaming? What was happening? The old woman's voice had changed and become as familiar to me as my own.

	'Well, Jane, do you know me?' asked the familiar voice. And, struggling with the old clothes, Mr. Rochester stepped out of his disguise.

	'Sir, you've been talking nonsense to make me talk nonsense. It's hardly fair.'

	'Do you forgive me, Jane?'

	'I shall try to, sir. But you shouldn't have done it.'

	'What are my guests doing, Jane?'

	'Discussing the gipsy, I imagine. Oh, and did you know that a stranger has arrived to see you?'

	'A stranger! I wasn't expecting anyone. Who can it be?'

	'His name's Mason, sir, and he comes from the West Indies.'

	The smile froze on Mr. Rochester's lips, and his face went white.

	'Mason! The West Indies!' he repeated three times.

	'Do you feel ill, sir?' I asked, worried.

	'Jane, help me,' he murmured, almost falling. I helped him to sit down, and sat with him. He took my hand and rubbed it gently, 'I wish I were on an island with you and nobody else, with no trouble or danger or terrible memories to make me suffer.'

	'How can I help you, sir? I'd give my life to help you.'

	'Jane, if I need help, I'll ask you, I promise. Get me a glass of wine now.' I fetched one from the dining-room, and gave it to him. He looked less pale, but very stern.

	'Jane, if all those fine guests of mine came and spat at me, what would you do?' he asked.

	'Turn them out of the house, sir, if I could.'

	'But if they only looked at me coldly, and whispered behind their hands about me, and then left me one by one?'

	'I'd stay with you, sir, to comfort you.'

	'And if the whole world disapproved of me, would you still stay with me?'

	'If you deserved my friendship, as I'm sure you do, I wouldn't care about other people's disapproval.'

	'Thank you, Jane. Now go and ask Mr. Mason to come and see me.' So I did, and, leaving the two men in the library, went to bed. Much later I heard him showing Mr. Mason to his bedroom, and was glad that Mr. Rochester sounded so cheerful.



	CHAPTER THIRTEEN

	The stranger is attacked

	I was woken by the full moon shining in on me, as I had forgotten to draw my curtains. Suddenly, a wild, terrible cry broke the silence, echoing throughout the house. My heart missed a beat. What could it mean? It came from the top floor. Then I heard the sounds of a desperate struggle, just above my room. 'Help! Help! Help! Won't anyone help me? Rochester! Rochester! For God's sake, come!' shouted a voice from upstairs.

	Bedroom doors were opened as the guests woke up. 'What's happening?'

	'Fetch a candle!'

	'Is it a fire?'

	'Are there burglars?'

	'Where's Rochester? He isn't in his room!'

	'Here I am!' called the master of the house, descending with a candle from the top floor. 'It's all right. Don't be afraid, ladies. A servant's had a bad dream, that's all, and started screaming. Nothing to worry about. Please go back to your rooms. You'll catch cold otherwise.' And so he calmed his guests and persuaded them to return to their rooms.

	But I knew that the sounds I had heard could have nothing to do with a servant's dream. So I dressed and waited in my room, in case I was needed. After about an hour, when Thornfield Hall was completely silent again, there was a cautious knock on my door.



	'Are you awake, Jane?' asked the voice I had been expecting.

	'Yes, sir, and dressed.'

	'Good, I need you. Come and help me. Bring a clean cloth with you.' We went quietly up to the top floor, where he unlocked one of the small black doors.

	'Do you feel faint at the sight of blood?' he asked.

	'I don't think so,' I replied. We entered a room with curtains hung on the walls. One of the curtains was tied back to reveal a secret door into another small room. From there came an angry growling sound, almost like a dog.

	'Wait here,' said Mr. Rochester, and went into the secret room where a shout of laughter greeted him. Ah, so Grace Poole was there! He came out quickly and closed the secret door. Then he showed me why he needed me. In an armchair lay Mr. Mason, his clothes and his arm covered in blood. As we bent over him, he opened his eyes and groaned.

	'Am I going to die?' he murmured weakly.

	'No, man, don't be foolish. It's just a scratch,' answered Mr. Rochester. 'Now Jane,' turning to me, 'I'll have to leave you in this room with Mason while I fetch the doctor. You must wipe away the blood with the damp cloth, like this, and help him to drink a little water. But on no account must you speak to him. Is that understood?' I nodded, and nervously watched him leave the room. I could hear him turning the key in the lock.

	So here I was, in the middle of the night, locked in with a bleeding, dying man, and a wild, murdering woman only the other side of a door! It seemed a long night, interrupted only by Mason's groans, and by occasional animal-like noises from the secret room. I had plenty of time to wonder why these violent attacks happened, first the fire in Mr. Rochester's room, and now a physical attack on a stranger. And how was Mr. Mason involved? Why was he here on the top floor? I had heard his host showing him to a bedroom near mine, on the second floor. And why was Mr. Rochester so frightened when Mr. Mason came to Thornfield?

	At last Mr. Rochester arrived with the doctor, who cleaned and bandaged Mason's wounds.

	'Strange!' remarked the doctor. The skin on the shoulder has been torn by teeth, as well as a knife!'

	'She bit me,' murmured Mason, 'when Rochester managed to get the knife from her.'

	'Well, I warned you not to see her alone,' said Rochester. 'You should have waited till the morning, then we could have seen her together. Don't worry, man, when you get back to the West Indies, you can forget her. Think of her as dead and buried. Now, doctor, is Mason ready to be moved? I have a carriage waiting outside. You'll take him home with you to avoid gossip, and then in a few days he'll be fit enough to leave the country.'

	Although it was now early morning, the house was still in total silence, and so there were no witnesses to see Mason being helped downstairs and put in the carriage.

	'Look after him, doctor,' said Rochester. 'Goodbye, Dick.'

	'Edward, make sure she's taken care of, make sure she's treated well...' Mason could not continue, but burst into tears.

	'I'll do my best, Dick, as I always have done,' replied Rochester, shutting the door of the carriage, which rolled away. 'But I wish there was an end to it!' he murmured to himself.

	As we were walking back through the garden to the house, he said to me, 'Jane, you've had a strange night. You look pale. Were you afraid when I left you alone with Mason?'

	'Not of Mason, sir, but of Grace Poole in the secret room.'

	'But I'd locked her door. I would never leave you in danger.'

	'Will she go on living here, sir?' I asked.

	'Oh yes. Don't think about her.'

	'But I'm sure your life is in danger while she's here.'

	'Don't worry, I can take care of myself. I'm in more danger while Mason's in England. I live in constant fear of a disaster.'

	'But Mr. Mason's weak! You have great influence with him!'

	'Yes. He wouldn't knowingly hurt me, but by one careless word he could destroy, if not my life, at least my chance of happiness. Sit down with me on this bench, Jane. I want to ask you something.' The early sun warmed the bench and the birds were singing. 'Now, Jane, suppose a boy in a foreign country makes a mistake, not a crime, mind you. The results of this mistake have a terrible effect on his whole life. He comes home after years of suffering, and meets - someone, who is fresh and good and pure. Now, can he ignore society, can he forget the past, and live the rest of his life with her in peace?'

	It was a difficult question to answer. In the end I said,

	'You can't rely on a human being to cure you of evil and give you peace. You must ask God's help.'

	'But I think I've found the cure! It's...' He paused. I held my breath. I almost thought the birds would stop singing to hear the name he was going to say.

	'Yes,' he said in quite a different, hard voice, 'you've noticed my love for Miss Ingram, haven't you? Don't you think she'll cure me of my wickedness, Jane? Oh, I can hear some of the guests in the garden. Go into the house by the back door.' As I went one way, and he another, I heard him say cheerfully to the gentlemen, 'Mason's already left. I got up early to say goodbye to him.'



	CHAPTER FOURTEEN

	Trouble at Gateshead

	When I was a child at Gateshead, Bessie the nursemaid used to say that to dream of children was a sure sign of trouble to come. For a whole week now I had dreamed of a small child every night, and perhaps Bessie was right, as a message came from Gateshead.

	It appeared that my cousin John Reed, who had spent and wasted all his money and some of his mother's, and been in debt or in prison most of his life, had killed himself a week before. And then Mrs. Reed, whose health had been badly affected by worrying about her son, had suddenly fallen ill when she heard of his death. Although she could hardly speak, she had recently managed to express a wish to see me. And so my cousins Eliza and Georgiana had sent their coachman, Robert, to bring me back to Gateshead.

	I felt I could not refuse to see my aunt, perhaps for the last time. So I went to ask Mr. Rochester's permission to leave Thornfield for a while. I found him talking to Miss Ingram, who looked at me in disgust when I interrupted their conversation.

	'Well, Jane, what is it?' he asked, when we had left the room full of guests and gone into the library.

	'Please, sir, I would like permission to visit my aunt, who is ill, for a week or two.'

	'Your aunt! You told me you had no relations!'

	'I have none who love me, sir. She's Mrs. Reed, my uncle's wife. Her son has died recently. I really can't neglect her now that she is dying.'

	'What nonsense, Jane, rushing off to visit an old lady who has never loved you! But I see you've decided to go. Where does she live and how long will you stay?'

	'She lives at Gateshead, sir, a hundred miles away. I'll stay as short a time as I can.'

	'Promise me only to stay a week.'

	'I can't promise, sir, I might have to stay longer.'

	'And you certainly can't travel a hundred miles alone!'

	'They've sent the coachman for me, sir. I'll leave tomorrow.'

	Mr. Rochester thought for a while.

	'Well, you'll need some money. I haven't paid you any salary yet. How much have you in the world, Jane?' he asked, smiling.

	I showed him my tiny purse. He took it and laughed as he counted the few coins. Then he took out his wallet.

	'Here is $50,' he said, offering me a note.

	'But you only owe me $15, sir!' I cried.

	'On second thoughts, give me that back. If you had $50, perhaps you would stay away for three months. Here is $10. Is that enough?'

	'Now you owe me $5, sir,' I pointed out.

	'You'll have to come back for it then,' he said, laughing.

	'There's something else, sir. You've told me you're going to marry soon. In that case, Adele should go to boarding school.'

	'To get her out of my lovely bride's way? A very sensible suggestion. But what about you?'

	'I must find another job somewhere. I'll advertise.'

	'Don't you dare!' he growled. 'Promise me, Jane, not to look for another job. I'll take care of that.'

	'I'll promise, sir, if you promise that Adele and I will be out of your house before your bride enters it.'

	'Very well! And now we must say goodbye.'

	'Goodbye, Mr. Rochester.'

	I set out early the next morning and travelled all day. As I approached Gateshead Hall, I realized it was nine years since I had left it. In that time I had made some friends, gained much self-confidence, and finally lost my hatred of the Reeds.

	I was delighted to see my old friend Bessie again. She had married Robert the coachman, and was very busy with her three young children. The house itself had not changed at all, but my cousins certainly had. Eliza was now very tall and thin, with a rather sour face, dressed in very plain clothes, and with a cross hanging round her neck. Georgiana, on the other hand, was still pretty but very fat, and wore extremely fashionable clothes. They did not seem pleased to see me, in fact they more or less ignored me, but I hardly noticed their rudeness. I told the housekeeper that I would be staying for several days, and then went straight to my aunt's room.

	I remembered it well from my childhood. I had often been called there to be punished. Bending over her bed I kissed her.

	'How are you, dear aunt?' I asked. I had sworn never to call her aunt again, but I did not regret breaking that promise to myself. I held her hand.

	'Are you Jane Eyre?' she asked. Her face, although deathly pale, was as stern as ever, and she removed her hand from mine. 'That child was more trouble to me than anyone would believe! I was glad to send her to Lowood. And John! Poor John! He needs so much money! Where can I get more money from? What will happen?' She seemed very confused and excited, so I left her to sleep.

	Her illness got worse in the next few days. I spent some time every day looking after her, and the rest of the time with my cousins, listening to their plans for the future. Eliza was planning to join a religious community after her mother's death, but Georgiana was hoping to stay in London with relations, to see the new fashions and go to all the parties. It was quite clear they had no real feeling for their mother, and were almost looking forward to her death.

	One dark, stormy night I visited the dying woman. She lay there asleep in her room, neglected by her daughters and servants. As I looked out of the window into the black emptiness, I wondered about the great mystery of death, and thought of Helen Burns, who was so sure her spirit would go to heaven. Would my aunt's spirit go there too?

	'Who are you?' I heard the sick woman murmuring. 'I wanted to see Jane Eyre. I must tell her something.'

	'I am Jane Eyre, aunt,' I told her gently.

	'I know I'm very ill,' she said weakly. 'Before I die I must confess what I've done wrong. First, I broke my promise to my husband about you, and second-' She broke off. 'After all, perhaps I don't need to tell her,' she said to herself. And then, 'No, it's no good, I know I'm dying. I must tell her, and quickly! Jane Eyre, take the letter from the top drawer of my desk, and read it.' I did so. It said:

	Madeira

	Dear Mrs. Reed,

	Please inform me of the address of my niece, Jane Eyre. As I am unmarried, with no children, and fairly wealthy, I would like her to come to Madeira to live with me, and to inherit all my property when I die.

	John Eyre

	'Why did I never hear of this?' I asked, amazed.

	'I hated you so much that I wrote back to him, telling him you had died of typhus fever at Lowood. That was my revenge on you, for causing me so much trouble!' she cried angrily.

	'Dear aunt,' I said, 'don't think about that any more. I was only a child, it's not surprising I was a nuisance.'

	'You were always so angry and violent, such a wicked child!'

	'Not as wicked as you think. I would have loved you if you'd let me. Forget it all and kiss me now, aunt.' But it was too late for her to break the habit of dislike, and she turned away from me. Poor woman! She died soon afterwards, keeping her hatred of me alive in her heart, and no one at Gateshead cried for her.



	CHAPTER FIFTEEN

	The future Mrs. Rochester

	So I set out on the long journey back to Thornfield. Mrs. Fairfax had written to me while I was at Gateshead, telling me that the guests had all gone, and Mr. Rochester had gone to London to buy a carriage for his wedding. It was clear that he would be getting married very soon.

	After a long day sitting in the coach, I decided to get out at Millcote, leave my luggage at the hotel, and walk across the fields to Thornfield. It was a warm June evening, and I felt glad to be going home. I had to remind myself sternly that Thornfield was not my permanent home, and that the person I was so looking forward to seeing was perhaps not even thinking of me.

	And then I saw him! He was sitting on the gate ahead of me, writing in a notebook. He noticed me at once.

	'Hallo!' he cried. I was trembling at the unexpected sight of him, and could not control my voice, so I approached in silence.

	'So it's Jane Eyre!' he continued. 'Why didn't you send for a carriage? It's just like you to come on foot from Millcote. Now, what have you been doing for a whole month?'

	'I've been looking after my aunt, sir, who's just died.'

	'You come from another world, Jane, from the world of the dead. I think you must be a spirit. And absent for a whole month! I'm sure you've quite forgotten me.'

	Even though I knew I would soon lose him, he had such power to make me happy that I was in heaven listening to him.

	'Did Mrs. Fairfax tell you I've been to London?' he asked.

	'Oh yes, sir, she did.'

	'And I expect she told you why I went there? Well, you must see the carriage I've bought, Jane. It will suit Mrs. Rochester perfectly. I only wish I were more handsome, as she's so beautiful. Can't you put one of your spells on me, to make me more attractive for her?'

	'That's beyond the power of magic, sir,' I replied, while thinking 'To someone who loves you, you are handsome enough.'

	Mr. Rochester was sometimes able to read my thoughts, but this time he just smiled warmly at me, and opened the gate.

	'Pass, friend,' he said, 'and welcome home!'

	I could have just walked past him in silence, but something made me turn and say quickly, before I could stop myself, 'Thank you, Mr. Rochester, for your great kindness. I'm glad to come back to you, and wherever you are is my home - my only home.' I ran across the field and into the house before he had time to answer.

	Two weeks passed after my return, with no news of the wedding. There were no preparations at Thornfield, and no visits to the Ingram family, who lived only a few miles away. I almost began to hope.

	It was the middle of summer, and every day the sun shone on the green fields, the white, baked roads, and the cool, dark woods. One evening, after Adele had gone to sleep, I went into the garden. I discovered a quiet place where I thought nobody would find me, but then I noticed Mr. Rochester had come into the garden too. Hoping to escape back to the house, I crept quietly behind him while he was bending over to admire an insect, but ...

	'Jane,' he said suddenly, 'come and look at this beautiful insect. Oh, now he's flown away. No, don't go back to the house, Jane, on such a lovely night. Come and walk with me.' I could not find a reason for leaving him, so I accompanied him in silence.

	'Jane,' he began, 'you like Thornfield, don't you? And you even like little Adele, and old Mrs. Fairfax, don't you?'

	'I do, sir, I really don't want to leave them.'

	'What a pity!' he sighed. 'That's what happens in life. No sooner have you got used to a place than you have to move on.'

	'Do I have to move on, sir? Leave Thornfield?'

	'I'm afraid you must, Jane.'

	'Then you are going to be married, sir?'

	'Exactly, Jane. And as you have pointed out, when I take the lovely Miss Ingram as my bride, you and Adele must leave the house, so I'm looking for a new job for you.'

	'I'm sorry to cause you trouble,' I said miserably. 'No trouble at all! In fact I've already heard of a very good job which would be just right for you, teaching the five daughters of an Irish family. You'll like Ireland, I think. They're such friendly people,' he said cheerfully.

	'It's such a long way away, sir!' I was fighting to keep my tears back. There was an icy coldness in my heart.

	'Away from what, Jane?'

	'From England and from Thornfield and -'

	'Well?'

	'From you, sir!' I could not stop myself, and burst into tears immediately.

	'It certainly is very far away,' he said calmly. 'Let's sit on this bench, Jane, like old friends saying goodbye. You know, I sometimes feel as if you and I were connected by a string tying our two hearts together, and if you went to Ireland, I think that string might break and I might bleed to death.'

	'I wish... I wish I'd never been born!' I cried. 'I wish I'd never come to Thornfield!' No longer able to control my feelings, I poured out what was in my heart. 'I can't bear to leave! Because here I've been treated kindly. And because I've met you, Mr. Rochester, and I can't bear never to see you again. Now I have to leave, I feel as if I'm dying!'

	'Why do you have to leave?' he asked innocently. 'Why?' I repeated, amazed. 'Because you're marrying Miss Ingram - she's your bride!'

	'My bride! I have no bride!' he answered. 'But I will have one, and you must stay!'

	'I can't stay!' I cried furiously. 'Do you think I can watch another woman become your bride? Do you think I'm a machine, without feelings? Do you think, because I'm small and poor and plain, that I have no soul and no heart? Well, you're wrong! I have as much soul and heart as you. It is my spirit that speaks to your spirit! We are equal in the sight of God!'

	'We are!' repeated Mr. Rochester, taking me in his arms and kissing me. 'Don't struggle, Jane, like a wild restless bird!'

	'Let me go, Mr. Rochester. I am no bird, but a free human being,' and I managed to break away.

	'Yes, Jane, you are free to decide. I ask you to walk through life with me, to be my constant companion.'

	'You're laughing at me. You've already chosen your companion for life.' I was crying quietly, while Mr. Rochester looked gently and seriously at me.

	'Jane,' he said, 'I ask you to be my wife. You are my equal, Jane. Will you marry me? Don't you believe me?'

	'Not at all,' I answered.

	'I'll convince you! Listen, I don't love Miss Ingram and she doesn't love me. She only liked me for my wealth, and when I, disguised as the gipsy woman, told her that I had only a little money, she and her mother lost interest in me. You strange magical spirit, I love you! You, small and poor and plain, I ask you to marry me!'

	'You want to marry me?' I cried, almost beginning to believe him. 'But I have no friends, no money, no family!'

	'I don't care, Jane! Say yes, quickly! It's cruel to make me suffer like this! Give me my name, say, "Edward, I'll marry you!" ' he cried, his face very pale in the moonlight.

	'Are you serious? Do you really love me? Do you honestly want me to be your wife?' I asked.

	'I swear it.'

	'Then, Edward, I will marry you.'

	'My little wife!' He held me in his arms for a long time, kissing me gently. Once he murmured, 'No family! That's good. No family to interfere!' and then, 'I don't care what people think!' and again and again, 'Are you happy, Jane?' I thought of nothing except the great happiness of being with him for ever.

	But while we were talking the weather had changed. A strong wind was now blowing and there was a loud crack of thunder. Suddenly rain poured down, and although we hurried back to the house, we were quite wet when we arrived in the hall. We did not notice Mrs. Fairfax standing in the shadows.

	'Good night, my darling,' he said, kissing me repeatedly. As I ran upstairs, I caught sight of the old lady's shocked face.

	'Tomorrow I'll explain to her,' I thought. Just then I was too happy to think about anything except our bright future.

	Outside, the storm continued furiously all night, and in the morning we discovered that the great tree at the bottom of the garden, which had stood for hundreds of years, had been hit by lightning and torn in half.



	CHAPTER SIXTEEN

	Preparing for the wedding

	I was a little nervous before seeing Mr. Rochester next morning. Was I really going to marry him, or was it all a dream? But I soon felt calmer when he came to meet me and kissed me.

	'Jane, you look well and smiling and pretty,' he said. 'You will be Jane Rochester in four weeks' time, not a day more. I'll send for my family jewels, which are kept in a London bank. They are for my bride, whether she's a great lady or a governess.'

	'Oh no, sir!' I cried. 'I'm too plain for jewels! I'm not used to wearing them.'

	'I insist, Jane. Today I'm taking you in the carriage to Millcote to buy you some elegant clothes. In a month's time we'll have a quiet wedding in the local church, and after a few days in London we'll travel through all the countries of Europe.'

	'Well, sir, you seem very eager to please me, but I wonder if you will agree to a request of mine.'

	'Ask me anything, Jane, anything!'

	'Indeed I will. This is my request. I ask you not to give me jewels and fine clothes.'

	'If that's really your wish, I agree. But can't you think of anything I can give you?'

	'Well, I'd like you to give me the answer to a question.'

	He looked worried, and turned away from me.

	'Curiosity is dangerous,' he said. 'I may not be able to agree to this particular request. Well, what is it?'

	'How stern you look! I suppose that's how you will look when we are married! This is what I want to know. Why did you take such trouble to make me believe you wished to marry Miss Ingram?'

	He stopped frowning at once and smiled down at me.

	'Is that all? What a relief! All right, I shall have to confess although you may be angry with me, Jane - as angry as you were last night, when you told me we were equal. Well, I pretended to love Miss Ingram to make you madly jealous. I wanted you to be as much in love with me as I was with you.'

	'And I suppose you didn't care at all about poor Miss Ingram's feelings?'

	'She only has one feeling - pride. Were you jealous, Jane?'

	'Never mind, Mr. Rochester. One more request - please explain everything to Mrs. Fairfax. She looked so shocked last night!'

	When I visited the old housekeeper later that day, I found she was amazed by the news that I was going to marry the master.

	'I would never have thought it!' she kept repeating. 'Mr. Rochester, so proud and such a gentleman! To marry his governess!' She examined me closely, as if to discover the reason for this strange event, and shook her head, still puzzled. 'He's twenty years older than you! He could be your father!'

	'No, indeed, Mrs. Fairfax,' I replied crossly. 'He looks much younger than that!'

	'Is he really going to marry you for love?' she asked.

	I was so hurt by her amazement that tears came to my eyes.

	'Why?' I asked. 'Do you think he couldn't possibly love me?'

	'No, no, Miss Eyre, but you must realize that this is a very unusual situation. You must be careful of your reputation. I advise you to keep him at a distance until you are married.'

	Although I was upset by the old lady's words, I followed her advice, and in the weeks before the wedding I went on teaching Adele as usual. Only in the evenings did I spend some time with Mr. Rochester, and I was careful not to allow him to hold me in his arms or kiss me. Sometimes he was angry with me and called me a 'hard little thing' or 'a cruel spirit', but I preferred that to being called 'my darling'. I saw that Mrs. Fairfax approved of my correct behaviour, and I knew that he respected me for it. But it was not easy for me I would rather have shown him my love. My future husband was becoming my whole world, and more than that, my hope of heaven. At last the night before the wedding arrived. My clothes were packed and I was ready. But I was anxious to see Mr. Rochester, who had been away on business, so I ran out of the quiet house to meet him on the road. A wild, stormy wind was blowing, and in the garden I passed the wreck of the great tree. Then suddenly I saw him riding towards me.

	'You see!' he shouted. 'You can't do without me! Jump up on to my horse!' Together we rode back to Thornfield. While he ate dinner, I sat quietly beside him. He looked closely at me.

	'You look sad, Jane,' he said. 'Is anything wrong? Are you nervous about your new life?'

	'No,' I replied firmly. 'I'm not worried about that, because I love you. But last night I had a strange dream, a terrible dream! It was dark and windy outside, and before I went to sleep I could hear a dog growling in the distance. In my dream I was carrying a small child in my arms down a long road. I was trying to catch up with you, but I couldn't.'

	'And you still worry about a foolish dream, when I'm close to you? But say you love me again, Jane.'

	'I do love you, Edward. But I haven't finished my story.'

	'Is there more? Well, go on.'

	'I dreamed that Thornfield was totally destroyed, just a heap of stones. I was still carrying the child, but now I could see you riding away into the distance. I knew you would never come back! Then I woke up.'

	'That's all then, Jane. Nothing to worry about.'

	'No, wait. There was candle-light in my room, and a strange shape examining the wedding dress hanging in my cupboard. My blood ran cold. It wasn't Mrs. Fairfax or any of the servants, it wasn't even Grace Poole. It was a horrible sight!'

	'Describe the shape, Jane!'

	'It looked like a tall woman, with long thick dark hair hanging down. She took up the beautiful veil you bought me, put it on her own head, then turned to admire herself in the mirror. It was then that I saw her wild, inhuman face! She removed the veil, tore it in two and threw it on the floor.'

	'And then?' Mr. Rochester seemed almost nervous. 'She came to my bedside, put her candle close to my face and stared fiercely at me. I must have fainted, and I suppose she left. Now can you tell me who or what that woman was?'

	'Jane, you are too sensitive. That was just a dream. Don't think about it any more!' he answered comfortingly.

	'That's just what I said to myself when I woke up this morning, but when I looked on the floor, there was the veil, torn in two halves!' I felt Mr. Rochester suddenly tremble.

	'To think what might have happened!' he cried, throwing his arms around me. 'Thank God it was only the veil!' After a few moments he said calmly, 'Now, Jane, be sensible. That woman must have been Grace Poole. There is no other explanation.'

	'Perhaps you're right,' I admitted slowly. 'One day I'll explain to you why I keep her in my house. But tonight, go and sleep in Adele's room. You'll be quite safe there. Just dream about our future!'



	CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

	The wedding day

	We had no friends or family to accompany us to the church. I had not told my Reed cousins about our wedding, but I had written to my uncle, John Eyre, in Madeira. Mr. Rochester was in such a hurry that he only allowed me a short time to put on my wedding dress and veil.

	'Jane, you look lovely,' he said. 'But you can only have ten minutes for breakfast!' We almost ran up the road to the church, his strong hand holding mine. His dark face looked stern, and he did not speak. I did not notice the weather or my surroundings at all, I only wanted to know why he looked so fierce. Suddenly he noticed how pale I was, and stopped for a moment to let me get my breath back. Then we walked more slowly into the church.

	The priest and the clerk were waiting for us. There was nobody else except two strangers who were standing at the back of the church. The ceremony began, and soon I heard the priest come to the point in the wedding, where he had to ask, 'Is there any reason why these two people should not be married?'

	The priest paused for a second, as was the custom, but before he could continue, a voice from the back of the church said clearly, 'There is a reason.'

	The priest looked up from his book, and stood silent. Mr. Rochester said in his deep voice, without turning his head, 'Continue with the ceremony.'

	Silence fell again. Then the priest shook his head. 'I must investigate this first,' he said. One of the strangers from the back of the church came forward and said, calmly and quietly,

	'This wedding cannot continue, because Mr. Rochester is already married.'

	I felt as if I had been hit. Mr. Rochester's whole face was like colourless marble. Without speaking or smiling, he was holding me tightly round the waist, as if he would never let go.

	'Who are you?' he growled at the stranger. 'And tell me what you know of this supposed wife of mine.'

	'I'm a lawyer, sir. I have a certificate here proving that you married Bertha Mason in the West Indies fifteen years ago.'

	'That may prove I've been married, but it doesn't prove that she's still alive.'

	'I can produce a witness,' said the lawyer, 'who has seen her alive recently.'

	'Produce him - or go to hell!' said Mr. Rochester.

	'Here he is. Mr. Mason!' called the lawyer. And the second stranger slowly approached from the shadows, his pale face looking frightened. Mr. Rochester, staring furiously at him, raised his strong right arm to knock him down.

	'No!' cried Mason, trembling. Mr. Rochester dropped his arm, and turned away in disgust.

	'Sir,' said the priest, frowning, 'don't forget we are in the house of God. Mr. Mason, please tell us if this gentleman's wife is still alive.'

	'She's at Thornfield Hall,' replied Mason in a weak voice. 'I'm her brother and I've seen her there.'

	'Thornfield Hall!' cried the priest. 'I've lived here for years, and I've never heard of a Mrs. Rochester!'

	'I was careful to keep her a secret,' murmured Mr. Rochester, frowning. After a few minutes' thought, he announced, 'I must reveal the truth, I suppose. There will be no wedding today. No doubt God will punish me for this. What this lawyer says is true. I've been married, and my wife still lives! I was tricked into marrying her when I was young, in the West Indies. Madness runs in her family, but they didn't tell me that. Now she's more of an animal than a woman. I keep her locked away, guarded by my old servant Grace Poole. I invite you all to come to my house to see her, and to judge whether I had the right to ask this innocent young girl to marry me. Follow me!'

	Still holding me firmly, he left the church, followed by the others. At the door of Thornfield Hall, Mrs. Fairfax, Adele and the servants rushed forward, smiling, to congratulate us.

	'Too late!' cried the master, waving them away. 'Your congratulations are fifteen years too late. We all went up to the top floor, and entered the room where Mason had been attacked. Mr. Rochester lifted the curtain, opened the secret door and showed us the little room. Grace Poole was making soup over a fire, and behind her a shape crawled on the floor. It was hard to say whether it was animal or human. It growled like a wild animal, but it wore clothes, and had long, thick, dark hair.

	'How are you, Mrs. Poole?' asked the master. 'And how is your patient today?'

	'Not bad, sir,' answered Grace, 'but be careful. She'll try and bite you if she sees you, sir.' Just then the shape turned and with a fierce cry attacked Mr. Rochester violently. I recognized her dark, ugly face. They struggled for a moment, and then he held her down and, with Mrs. Poole's help, tied her to a chair. He turned to the others with a bitter smile.

	'You see, gentlemen, this is my wife. This is the partner I have to live with for ever. And instead I wished to have this' (laying his hand on my shoulder) '...this young girl. Can you honestly blame me? Compare the two, and then judge me!'

	We all left the room silently. As we went downstairs the lawyer said to me, 'I know you weren't aware of this, Miss Eyre. Nobody will blame you, and Mr. Mason will tell your uncle so, when he goes back to Madeira.'

	'My uncle! Do you know him?' I asked, surprised. 'I'm his lawyer. Mr. Mason and he have often done business together. On his way back to the West Indies, Mr. Mason stopped in Madeira and stayed with Mr. Eyre, who mentioned that his niece was going to marry a Mr. Rochester.'

	'Yes, I wrote to tell him I was getting married,' I said.

	'Well, when Mr. Mason explained that Mr. Rochester was already married, your uncle sent him straight back to England to prevent you from marrying and making a terrible mistake. I'm afraid your uncle is very ill and will probably die soon, so I think you had better stay in England, until you receive further news of him.'

	After the gentlemen had left, I entered my room and locked the door. Slowly I took off my wedding dress and veil. I was weak and exhausted, and only just beginning to realize what had happened. Could I ever again trust the being I had turned into a sort of god? I would not think of him as evil, but he could not have felt real love for me. How foolish I had been to believe him, and love him so much! My hopes were all dead, and my future was empty. I lay on my bed, faint and wishing for death, while darkness swam around me.





	CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

	Mr. Rochester's explanation

	Sometime in the afternoon I recovered a little, but I felt faint as I stood up, and realized I had not eaten anything all day. So I opened my bedroom door and almost fell over Mr. Rochester, who was sitting in a chair just outside.

	'I've been waiting for you all this time, Jane,' he said. 'And I haven't heard you scream or shout or cry. Aren't you angry with me? I never meant to hurt you. Will you ever forgive me?'

	He sounded so sincere that I forgave him at once in my heart. 'Scold me, Jane! Tell me how wicked I am!' he said. 'Sir, I can't. I feel tired and weak. I want some water.'

	He took me in his arms and carried me downstairs to the library, where he put me in front of the fire, and gave me a glass of wine. I began to feel better. He bent to kiss me, but I turned my face determinedly away.

	'What!' he cried. 'You refuse to kiss me! Because I'm Bertha Mason's husband? Is that it?'

	'Yes, sir.'

	'I know you very well, Jane. I know how firm you are when you've decided something. You're planning to destroy my hope of happiness. You intend to be a stranger to me from now on. And if I'm friendly towards you in future, you'll remind yourself, "That man nearly made me his mistress - I must be ice-cold to him," and ice-cold is what you'll be.'

	'It's true, sir,' I said, trying to stop my voice from trembling, 'that everything around me has changed, so I must change too. Adele must have a new governess.'

	'Oh, Adele will go to boarding school. I've already decided that. And you and I will both leave this house, this narrow stone hell, this house of living death. We can never be happy here, under the same roof as that woman. Oh, I hate her!'

	'You shouldn't hate her, sir,' I said. 'It's not her fault she's mad, poor thing.'

	'Jane, my darling, it's not because she's mad that I hate her. If you were mad, I wouldn't hate you. I'd look after you lovingly. But why talk of madness? We are all ready to travel, everything is packed. Tomorrow we'll leave. I have a place to go to, where nobody will find us or talk about us-'

	'And take Adele with you, sir, she'll be a companion for you,' I interrupted. 'I knew I had to tell him soon.'

	'Adele? What do you mean, Jane? She's going to school. I don't want her, I want you with me. Do you understand?'

	I did, but I slowly shook my head. He was becoming angry, and was staring fiercely at me. He looked as if he was about to lose control. I was not at all afraid, because I knew I still had the power to calm him. So I took his hand and stroked it, saying,

	'Sit down, sir, I'll talk or listen to you as long as you like.' I had been struggling with tears for some time and now I let them flow freely. It was a great relief.

	'Don't cry, Jane, please be calm,' he begged.

	'How can I be calm when you're so angry?'

	'I'm not angry, but I love you so much, and your pale little face looked so stern and decided.' He tried to put his arm round me, but I would not let him.

	'Jane!' he said sadly, 'you don't love me, then?'

	'I do love you,' I answered, 'more than ever, but this is the last time I can say it. There is only one thing for me to do, but you'll be furious if I mention it.'

	'Oh, mention it! If I'm angry, you can always burst into tears,' he said, with a half-smile.

	'Mr. Rochester, I must leave you. I must start a new life among strangers.'

	'Of course. I told you we would leave. I'll ignore that nonsense about you leaving me. You'll be Mrs. Rochester and I'll be your husband until I die. We'll live happily and innocently together in a little white house I have in the south of France. Jane, don't shake your head, or I'll get angry.'

	'Sir, your wife is alive,' I dared to say, although he was looking aggressively at me, 'and if I lived with you like that, I'd be your mistress.'

	'I'm a fool!' he said suddenly. 'I haven't told you the whole story! Oh, I'm sure you'll agree when you know everything! Listen, Jane, you know that my father loved money very much?'

	'I heard someone say that, yes, sir.'

	'Well, he hated the idea of dividing the family property, so he left it all to my elder brother. But that meant I would be poor unless I married a rich wife, so he decided I should marry Bertha Mason, the daughter of his wealthy friend Jonas Mason. I was young and easily impressed, so when I saw her in the West Indies, beautiful and elegantly dressed, I thought I loved her. What a fool I was then! After the wedding I learned that my bride's mother and younger brother were both mad. Dick Mason will probably be in the same state one day. My father knew all this, but did not tell me. I soon found that Bertha and I had nothing in common. Not only was she coarse and stupid, her madness also made her violent. I lived with her for four years. By now my father and brother were dead, so I was rich, but I considered myself poor, because I was tied to a mad wife until death.'

	'I pity you, sir, I do pity you.'

	'Pity, Jane, is an insult from some people, but from you I accept it as the mother of love. Well, I had moments of despair when I intended to shoot myself, but in the end I decided to bring the mad woman back to Thornfield Hall, where nobody knew that we were married. She has lived here ever since. Even Mrs. Fairfax and the servants don't know the whole truth about her. But although I pay Grace Poole well, and trust her absolutely, she sometimes drinks too much and allows the creature to escape. Twice she has got out of her room at night, as you know. The first time she nearly burnt me in my bed, and the second time she visited you, and must have been reminded of her own wedding day by seeing your wedding dress.'

	'And what did you do, sir, when you had brought her here?'

	'I travelled all over Europe, Jane. I was looking for a good and intelligent woman to love-'

	'But you couldn't marry, sir,' I interrupted.

	'I believed I could. I thought I might find some reasonable woman who would understand my case and accept me.'

	'Well, sir, did you?'

	'Not in Europe, Jane, where I spent ten long years looking for an ideal. I tried taking mistresses, like Celine, the French dancer. But finally, bitter and disappointed with my wasted life, I returned to Thornfield on a frosty winter afternoon. And when my horse slipped and fell on the ice, a little figure appeared and insisted on helping me. In the weeks that followed, I began to depend on that bird-like little figure for my happiness and new interest in life.'

	'Don't talk any more of the past, sir,' I said, wiping a secret tear from my eye.

	'No, Jane, you're right, the future is much brighter. You understand now, don't you? I've wasted half my life in misery and loneliness, but now I've found you. You are at the centre of my heart. It was stupid of me to try to marry you like that without explaining. I should have confessed everything, as I do now, and appealed to your great generosity of spirit. I promise to love you and stay with you for ever. Jane, promise me the same.'

	A pause. 'Why are you silent, Jane?'

	This was a terrible moment for me. In the struggle and confusion that was going on in my heart I knew that he loved me and I loved him, but I also knew that I must leave him!

	'Jane, just promise me, "I will be yours".'

	'Mr. Rochester, I will not be yours.' Another pause.

	'Jane,' he said, with a gentleness that cut into my soul, 'Jane, do you intend us to live apart for ever?'

	'I do.'

	'Jane,' (bending towards me and kissing me), 'is that still your intention?'

	'It is,' I replied, pulling away from him.

	'Oh Jane, this is a bitter shock. It would not be wicked to love me.'

	'It would be wicked to do what you want.'

	'Jane, just imagine my horrible life when you have gone. I shall be alone with that mad woman upstairs. Where shall I find friendship, and hope?

	'You can only trust in God and yourself. Live without doing wrong, and die hoping to go to heaven.'

	'That's impossible without you! And ... and you have no family to offend by living with me!' He was beginning to sound desperate. I knew that what he said was true. However, in my heart I also knew I was right to leave.

	He seemed to read my thoughts. Rushing furiously across the room, he seized me violently and stared fiercely into my eyes. He could have broken me in two with one hand, but he could not break my spirit. Small and weak as I was, I stared firmly back at him. 'Your eyes, Jane,' he said, 'are the eyes of a bird, a free, wild being. Even if I break your cage, I can't reach you, beautiful creature! You'll fly away from me. But you could choose to fly to me! Come, Jane, come!' He let me go, and only looked at me. How hard it was to resist that look! 'I am going,' I said.

	'Does my deep love mean nothing to you? Oh Jane, my hope, my love, my life!' and he threw himself despairingly on the sofa. I had reached the door, but I could not leave. I walked back, bent over him, and kissed his cheek.

	'Goodbye, my dear master!' I said. 'May God protect you!'

	'Without your love, Jane, my heart is broken,' he said. 'But perhaps you will, so generously, give me your love after all-' He jumped up with hope in his eyes, holding out his arms to me. But I turned and ran out of the room.

	That night I only slept a little, dreaming of the red room at Gateshead. The moonlight shone into my bedroom, as it did then, and I saw a vision on the ceiling, a white figure looking down on me. It seemed to whisper to my spirit: 'Daughter, leave now before you are tempted to stay.'

	'Mother, I will,' I answered. And when I woke up, although it was still dark outside, I wrapped up some spare clothes in a parcel, and put a little money in a purse. As I crept downstairs, I could hear Mr. Rochester in his room, walking up and down and sighing. I could find heaven in this room if I wanted. I just had to enter and say, 'I will love you and live with you through life until death!' My hand moved towards the handle. But I stopped myself, and went miserably downstairs and out of the house.

	Setting out on the road, I could not help thinking of Mr. Rochester's despair when he found himself abandoned. I hated myself for wounding him, and for perhaps driving him to a life of wickedness, or even death. I wanted desperately to be with him, to comfort him, but somehow I made myself keep walking, and when a coach passed, I arranged to travel on it as far as my money would pay for. Inside the coach I cried the bitterest tears of my life.



	CHAPTER NINETEEN

	Finding shelter

	I was put down at Whitcross, a crossroads on the moor, after travelling for two days in the coach. As it rolled away, I realized I had left my parcel inside, and given the coachman all the coins in my purse. I was alone on the open moor, with no money or possessions. Lonely white roads stretched across the great, wide moors as far as the hills. I was glad to see there were no towns here, because I did not want people to question me or pity me. So I walked across the moor, until I found a dry place to sleep, in the shelter of a small hill. Luckily it was a warm night, with no rain. The next day was hot and sunny, but I needed food and water, so I could not stay on the moor.

	Taking one of the white roads, I eventually found a small village. I needed all my courage to knock on some of the doors, asking if there was any paid work I could do. None of the village people could help me, and I could not bring myself to beg for food, although by now I felt weak and faint. At the baker's I offered to exchange my leather gloves for a small cake, but the baker's wife looked at my dirty clothes and said, 'I'm sorry, but how do I know you haven't stolen them?' All I ate that day was a piece of bread, which I begged from a farmer eating his supper. I spent another night on the moor, but this time the air was cold and the ground was damp. Next day I walked from house to house again, looking in vain for work. I was now very weak from lack of food, and I began to wonder why I should struggle to stay alive, when I did not want to live.

	It was getting dark again, and I was alone on the moor. In the distance I could see a faint light, and I decided to try to reach it.

	The wind and rain beat down on me, and I fell down several times, but finally I arrived at a long, low house, standing rather isolated in the middle of the moor. Hiding near the door, I could just see into the kitchen through a small uncurtained window. There was an elderly woman, who might be the housekeeper, mending clothes, and two young ladies, who seemed to be learning a language with dictionaries. The kitchen looked so clean and bright, and the ladies so kind and sensible, that I dared to knock at the door. The elderly woman opened it, but she must have thought I was a thief or a beggar, because she refused to let me speak to the young ladies. The door closed firmly, shutting me out from the warmth inside.

	I dropped on to the wet doorstep, worn out and hopeless, prepared to die. There the young ladies' brother found me, when he returned home a few minutes later, and he insisted, much against the housekeeper's wishes, on bringing me into the house. They gave me bread and milk, and asked my name.

	'Jane Elliott,' I replied. I did not want anybody to know where I had come from. To their further questions I answered that I was too tired to speak. Finally they helped me upstairs to a bedroom, and I sank gratefully into a warm, dry bed.

	For three days and nights I lay in bed, exhausted by my experiences, and hardly conscious of my surroundings. As I was recovering, Hannah, the housekeeper, came to sit with me, and told me all about the family. She had known them since they were babies. Their mother had been dead for years, and their father had died only three weeks before. The girls, Diana and Mary Rivers, had to work as governesses, as their father had lost a lot of money in business. St John, their brother, was the vicar in the nearest village, Morton. They only used this house, called Moor House, in the holidays.

	When I felt strong enough to get dressed and go downstairs, Diana and Mary looked after me very kindly, and made me feel welcome in their pleasant home. Their brother, however, seemed stern and cold. He was between twenty-eight and thirty, fair-haired and extremely handsome. Diana and Mary were curious about my past, but sensitive enough to avoid asking questions which would hurt me. St John, on the other hand, made determined efforts to discover who I was, but I, just as firmly, refused to explain more than necessary. I told them only that, after attending Lowood school, I became a governess in a wealthy family, where an unfortunate event, not in any way my fault, caused me to run away. That was all I was prepared to say. I offered to do any kind of work, teaching, sewing, cleaning, so that I could become independent again. St John approved of my keenness to work, and promised to find me some paid employment.



	CHAPTER TWENTY

	A new home

	I spent a month at Moor House, in an atmosphere of warm friendship. I learned to love what Diana and Mary loved - the little old grey house, the wild open moors around it, and the lonely hills and valleys where we walked for hours. I read the books they read, and we discussed them eagerly.

	Diana started teaching me German, and I helped Mary to improve her drawing. We three shared the same interests and opinions, and spent the days and evenings very happily together.

	However, St John hardly ever joined in our activities. He was often away from home, visiting the poor and the sick in Morton. His strong sense of duty made him insist on going, even if the weather was very bad. But despite his hard work I thought he lacked true happiness and peace of mind. He often stopped reading or writing to stare into the distance, dreaming perhaps of some ambitious plan. Once I heard him speak at a church service in Morton, and although he was an excellent speaker, there was a certain bitterness and disappointment in his words. He was clearly not satisfied with his present life.

	The holiday was coming to an end. Soon Diana and Mary would leave Moor House to return to the wealthy families in the south, where they were both governesses, and St John would go back to the vicar's house in Morton, with Hannah, his housekeeper. Although his cold manner made it difficult for me to talk to him, I had to ask him whether he had found any employment for me. 'I have,' he answered slowly, 'but remember I am only a poor country vicar, and can't offer you a job with a high salary, so you may not wish to accept it. There's already a school for boys in Morton, and now I want to open one for girls, so I've rented a building for it, with a small cottage for the schoolteacher. Miss Oliver, who lives in the area and is the only daughter of a rich factory-owner, has kindly paid for the furniture. Will you be the schoolteacher? You would live in the cottage rent-free, and receive thirty dollars a year, no more.'

	I thought about it for a moment. It was not as good as being a governess in an important family, but at least I would have no master. I would be free and independent.

	'Thank you, Mr. Rivers, I accept gladly,' I replied. 'But you do understand?' he asked, a little worried. 'It will only be a village school. The girls will be poor and uneducated. You'll be teaching reading, writing, counting, sewing, that's all. There'll be no music or languages or painting.'

	'I understand, and I'll be happy to do it,' I answered. He smiled, well satisfied with me.

	'And I'll open the school tomorrow, if you like,' I added. 'Very good,' he agreed. Then looking at me, he said, 'But I don't think you'll stay long in the village.'

	'Why not? I'm not ambitious, although I think you are.' He looked surprised. 'I know I am, but how did you discover that? No, I think you won't be satisfied by living alone. You need people to make you happy.' He said no more.

	Diana and Mary lost their usual cheerfulness as the moment for leaving their home and their brother came closer.

	'You see, Jane,' Diana explained, 'St John is planning to become a missionary very soon. He feels his purpose in life is to spread the Christian religion in unexplored places where the people have never heard the word of God. So we won't see him for many years, perhaps never again! He looks quiet, Jane, but he's very determined. I know he's doing God's work, but it will break my heart to see him leave!' and she broke down in tears.

	Mary wiped her own tears away, as she said, 'We've lost our father. Soon we'll lose our brother too!'

	Just then St John himself entered, reading a letter. 'Our uncle John is dead,' he announced. The sisters did not look shocked or sad, but seemed to be waiting for more information. St John gave them the letter to read, and then they all looked at each other, smiling rather tiredly.

	'Well,' said Diana, 'at least we have enough money to live on. We don't really need any more.'

	'Yes,' said St John, 'but unfortunately we can imagine how different our lives might have been.' He went out. There was a silence for a few minutes, then Diana turned to me.

	'Jane, you must be surprised that we don't show any sadness at our uncle's death. I must explain. We've never met him. He was my mother's brother, and he and my father quarrelled years ago about a business deal. That's when my father lost most of his money. My uncle, on the other hand, made a fortune of twenty thousand dollars. As he never married and had no relations apart from us and one other person, my father always hoped we would inherit uncle John's money. But it seems this other relation has inherited his whole fortune. Of course we shouldn't have expected anything, but Mary and I would have felt rich with only a thousand dollars each, and St John would have been able to help so many more poor people!' She said no more, and none of us referred to the subject again that evening.

	The next day the Rivers family returned to their separate places of work, and I moved to the cottage in Morton.



	CHPATER TWENTY ONE

	Mr. Rivers' sacrifice



	I had twenty village girls to teach, some of them with such a strong country accent that I could hardly communicate with them. Only three could read, and none could write, so at the end of my first day I felt quite depressed at the thought of the hard work ahead of me. But I reminded myself that I was fortunate to have any sort of job, and that I would certainly get used to teaching these girls, who, although they were very poor, might be as good and as intelligent as children from the greatest families in England. Ever since I ran away from Thornfield, Mr. Rochester had remained in my thoughts, and now, as I stood at my cottage door that first evening, looking at the quiet fields, I allowed myself to imagine again the life I could have had with him in his little white house in the south of France. He would have loved me, oh yes, he would have loved me very much for a while. 'He did love me,' I thought, 'nobody will ever love me like that again.' But then I told myself that I would only have been his mistress, in a foreign country, and for a short time, until he grew tired of me. I should be much happier here as a schoolteacher, free and honest, in the healthy heart of England. But strangely enough, St John Rivers found me crying as he approached the cottage. Frowning at the sight of the tears on my cheeks, he asked me,

	'Do you regret accepting this job, then?'

	'Oh no,' I replied quickly, 'I'm sure I'll get used to it soon. And I'm really very grateful to have a home, and work to do. After all, I had nothing a few weeks ago.'

	'But you feel lonely, perhaps?' he asked, still puzzled. 'I haven't had time to feel lonely yet.'

	'Well, I advise you to work hard, and not to look back into your past. If something which we know is wrong tempts us, then we must make every effort to avoid it, by putting our energy to better use. A year ago I too was very miserable, because I was bored by the routine life of a country vicar, and I was tempted to change my profession. But suddenly there was light in my darkness, and God called me to be a missionary. No profession could be greater than that! Since that moment of truth, I have been perfectly happy, making my preparations for leaving England and going abroad in the service of God. Happy, that is, except for one little human weakness, which I have sworn to overcome.'

	His eyes shone as he spoke of his great purpose in life, and I was listening, fascinated, so neither of us heard the light footsteps approaching the cottage along the grassy path.

	'Good evening, Mr. Rivers,' said a charming voice, as sweet as a bell. St John jumped as if hit between the shoulders, then turned slowly and stiffly to face the speaker. A vision in white, with a young, girlish figure, was standing beside him. When she threw back her veil, she revealed a face of perfect beauty. St John glanced quickly at her, but dared not look at her for long. He kept his eyes on the ground as he answered, 'A lovely evening, but it's late for you to be out alone.'

	'Oh, Father told me you'd opened the new girls' school, so I simply had to come to meet the new schoolteacher. That must be you,' she said to me, smiling. 'Do you like Morton? And your pupils? And your cottage?' I realized this must be the rich Miss Oliver who had generously furnished my cottage.

	'Yes, indeed, Miss Oliver,' I replied. 'I'm sure I'll enjoy teaching here. And I like my cottage very much.'

	'I'll come and help you teach sometimes. I get so bored at home! Mr. Rivers, I've been away visiting friends, you know. I've had such fun! I was dancing with the officers until two o'clock this morning! They're all so charming!'

	St John's face looked sterner than usual and his lip curled in disapproval, as he lifted his handsome head and looked straight into Miss Oliver's laughing eyes. He breathed deeply and his chest rose, as if his heart wanted to fly out of its cage, but he said nothing, and after a pause Miss Oliver continued, 'Do come and visit my father, Mr. Rivers. Why don't you ever come?'

	'I can't come, Miss Rosamund.' It seemed clear to me that St John had to struggle with himself to refuse this smiling invitation.

	'Well, if you don't want to, I must go home then. Goodbye!' She held out her hand. He just touched it, his hand trembling.

	'Goodbye!' he said in a low, hollow voice, his face as white as a sheet. They walked away in different directions. She turned back twice to look at him, but he did not turn round at all.

	The sight of another person's suffering and sacrifice stopped me thinking so much about my own problems. I had plenty of opportunities to observe St John and Miss Oliver together. Every day St John taught one Bible lesson at the school, and Miss Oliver, who knew her power over him, always chose that particular moment to arrive at the school door, in her most attractive riding dress. She used to walk past the rows of admiring pupils towards the young vicar, smiling openly at him. He just stared at her, as if he wanted to say, 'I love you, and I know you love me. If I offered you my heart, I think you'd accept. But my heart is already promised as a sacrifice to God.' But he never said anything, and she always turned sadly away like a disappointed child. No doubt he would have given the world to call her back, but he would not give his chance of heaven.

	When I discovered that Miss Oliver's father greatly admired the Rivers family, and would have no objection to her marrying a vicar, I decided to try to persuade St John to marry her. I thought he could do more good with Miss Oliver's money in England, than as a missionary under the baking sun in the East.

	My chance came some weeks later, when he visited me one November evening in my little cottage. He noticed a sketch I had been doing of Miss Oliver, and could not take his eyes off it.

	'I could paint you an exact copy,' I said gently, 'if you admit that you would like it.'

	'She's so beautiful!' he murmured, still looking at it. 'I would certainly like to have it.'

	'She likes you, I'm sure,' I said, greatly daring, 'and her father respects you. You ought to marry her.'

	'It's very pleasant to hear this,' he said, not at all shocked by my honesty. 'I shall allow myself fifteen minutes to think about her.' And he actually put his watch on the table, and sat back in his chair, closing his eyes. 'Married to the lovely Rosamund Oliver! Let me just imagine it! My heart is full of delight!' And there was silence for a quarter of an hour until he picked up his watch, and put the sketch back on the table.

	'Temptation has a bitter taste,' he said, shaking his head. 'I can't marry her. You see, although I love her so deeply, I know that Rosamund would not make a good wife for a missionary.'

	'But you needn't be a missionary!' I cried. 'Indeed I must! It's the great work God has chosen me to do! I shall carry with me into the darkest corners of the world knowledge, peace, freedom, religion, the hope of heaven! That is what I live for, and what I shall die for!'

	'What about Miss Oliver?' I asked after a moment. 'She may be very disappointed if you don't marry her.'

	'Miss Oliver will forget me in a month, and will probably marry someone who'll make her far happier than I ever could!'

	'You speak calmly, but I know you're suffering.'

	'You are original,' he said, looking surprised. He had clearly not imagined that men and women could discuss such deep feelings together. 'But believe me, I have overcome this weakness of mine, and become as hard as a rock. My only ambition now is to serve God.' As he picked up his hat before leaving, something on a piece of paper on the table caught his eye. He glanced at me, then tore off a tiny piece very quickly, and with a rapid 'Goodbye!' rushed out of the cottage. I could not imagine what he had found to interest him so much.



	CHAPTER TWENTY TWO

	Sudden wealth

	When St. John left, it was beginning to snow, and it continued snowing all night and all the next day. In the evening I sat by my fire, listening to the wind blowing outside, and had just started reading when I heard a noise. The wind, I thought, was shaking the door, but no, it was St John, who came in out of the frozen darkness, his coat covered in snow.

	'What's happened?' I cried, amazed. 'I thought nobody would be out in weather like this! What's the matter?'

	'There's nothing wrong,' he answered calmly, hanging up his coat, and stamping the snow from his boots. 'I just came to have a little talk to you. Besides, since yesterday I've been eager to hear the other half of your story.' He sat down. I had no idea what he was referring to, and remembering his strange behaviour with the piece of paper, I began to fear that he might be going mad. He looked quite normal, however, and we made conversation for a while, although he seemed to be thinking of something else.

	Suddenly he said, 'When I arrived I said I wanted to hear the rest of your story. But perhaps it's better if I tell the story. I'm afraid you've heard it before, but listen anyway. Twenty years ago a poor vicar fell in love with a rich man's daughter. She also fell in love with him, and married him, against the advice of all her family. Sadly, less than two years later the couple were both dead. I've seen their grave. Their baby daughter was brought up by an aunt, a Mrs. Reed of Gateshead. You jumped - did you hear a noise? I'll continue. I don't know whether the child was happy with Mrs. Reed, but she stayed there ten years, until she went to Lowood school, where you were yourself. In fact, it seems her life was quite similar to yours. She became a teacher at Lowood, as you did, and then became a governess in the house of a certain Mr. Rochester.'

	'Mr. Rivers!' I interrupted, unable to keep silent.

	'I can imagine how you feel,' he replied, 'but wait till I've finished. I don't know anything about Mr. Rochester's character, but I do know that he offered to marry this young girl, who only discovered during the wedding ceremony that he was in fact already married, to a mad woman. The governess disappeared soon after this, and although investigations have been carried out, and advertisements placed in newspapers, and every effort made to find her, nobody knows where she's gone. But she must be found! Mr. Briggs, a lawyer, has something very important to tell her.'

	'Just tell me one thing,' I said urgently. 'What about Mr. Rochester? How and where is he? What's he doing? Is he well?'

	'I know nothing about Mr. Rochester. Why don't you ask the name of the governess, and why everybody is looking for her?'

	'Did Mr. Briggs write to Mr. Rochester?' I asked.

	'He did, but he received an answer not from him, but from the housekeeper, a Mrs. Fairfax.'

	I felt cold and unhappy. No doubt Mr. Rochester had left England for a life of wild pleasure in the cities of Europe. That was what I had been afraid of. Oh, my poor master- once almost my husband - who I had often called 'my dear Edward'!

	'As you won't ask the governess's name, I'll tell you myself,' continued St John. 'I've got it written down. It's always better to have facts in black and white.' And he took out of his wallet a tiny piece of paper, which I recognized as part of my sketch book, and showed it to me. On it I read, in my own writing, 'JANE EYRE', which I must have written without thinking.

	'The advertisements and Briggs spoke of a Jane Eyre, but I only knew a Jane Elliott,' said St John. 'Are you Jane Eyre?'

	'Yes - yes, but doesn't Mr. Briggs know anything about Mr. Rochester?' I asked desperately.

	'I don't think Briggs is at all interested in Mr. Rochester. You're forgetting the really important thing. Don't you want to know why he's been looking for you?'

	'Well, what did he want?' I asked, almost rudely.

	'Only to tell you that your uncle, Mr. Eyre of Madeira, is dead, that he has left you all his property, and that you're now rich - only that, nothing more.'

	Rich! One moment I was poor, the next moment I was wealthy. It was hard to realize my new situation. A fortune brings serious worries and responsibilities with it, which I could hardly imagine. I was sorry to hear that my uncle, my only surviving relation, was dead. However, the inheritance would give me independence for life, and I was glad of that.

	'Perhaps you would like to know how much you've inherited?' offered St John politely. 'It's nothing much really, just twenty thousand dollars, I think.'

	'Twenty thousand dollars?' The news took my breath away. St John, who I had never heard laugh before, actually laughed out loud at my shocked face. 'Perhaps... perhaps you've made a mistake?' I asked him nervously.

	'No, there's no mistake. Now I must be leaving. Good night.' He was about to open the door, when suddenly I called, 'Stop! Why did Mr. Briggs write to you in order to find me?'

	'Oh, I'm a vicar. I have ways of discovering things.'

	'No, that doesn't satisfy me. Tell me the truth,' I insisted, putting myself between him and the door.

	'Well, I'd rather not tell you just now, but I suppose you'll discover it sooner or later. Did you know that my full name is St John Eyre Rivers?'

	'No, I didn't! But then what-' And I stopped as light flooded my mind and I saw clearly the chain of circumstances which connected us. But St John continued his explanation.

	'My mother's name was Eyre,' he said. 'She had two brothers, one, a vicar, who married Miss Jane Reed of Gateshead, and the other, John Eyre of Madeira. Mr. Briggs, Mr. Eyre's lawyer, wrote to us telling us that our uncle had died, and left all his property, not to us, because of his quarrel with our father, but to his brother's daughter. Then Mr. Briggs wrote again later, saying this girl could not be found. Well, I've found her.' He moved towards the door, his hat in his hand.

	'Wait a moment, just let me think,' I said. 'So you, Diana and Mary are my cousins?'

	'We are your cousins, yes,' he said, waiting patiently. As I looked at him, it seemed I had found a brother and sisters to love and be proud of for the rest of my life. The people who had saved my life were my close relations! This was wealth indeed to a lonely heart, brighter and more life-giving than the heavy responsibility of coins and gold.

	'Oh, I'm glad - I'm so glad!' I cried, laughing. St John smiled. 'You were serious when I told you had inherited a fortune. Now you're excited about something very unimportant.'

	'What can you mean? It may mean nothing to you. You already have sisters and don't need any more family. But I had nobody, and now I suddenly have three relations in my world, or two, if you don't want to be counted.' I walked rapidly round the room, my thoughts rising so fast I could hardly understand them. The family I now had, the people who had saved me from starvation, I could now help them. There were four of us cousins. Twenty thousand dollars, shared equally, would be five thousand dollars each, more than enough for each one of us. It would be a fair and just arrangement, and we would all be happy. I would no longer have the worry of controlling a large amount of money, and they would never have to work again. We would all be able to spend more time together at Moor House.

	Naturally, when I made this suggestion to St John and his sisters, they protested strongly, and it was with great difficulty that I finally managed to convince them of my firm intention to carry out this plan. In the end they agreed that it was a fair way of sharing the inheritance, and so the legal steps were taken to transfer equal shares to all of us.



	CHAPTER TWENTY THREE

	A voice from the past



	I promised to stay at Morton school until Christmas, when St John would be able to find another teacher. He was there when I closed the school for the Christmas holidays. I was quite sorry to have to say goodbye to some of my pupils.

	'You see what progress they have made! And you've only worked here a few months!' he said. 'Imagine how much more good you could do if you gave your whole life to teaching!'

	'Yes,' I answered, 'but I couldn't do it for ever. Don't mention school, I'm on holiday now!'

	He looked serious. 'What are your plans?'

	'I want you to let me have Hannah for a few days. She and I are going to clean Moor House from top to bottom, and make all the Christmas preparations that you know nothing about, being only a man. Everything must be ready for Diana and Mary when they come home next week, for a really wonderful holiday.'

	St John smiled but he was still not satisfied with me. 'That's all right for the moment, but I hope, Jane, that you'll look higher than domestic activity, and think about a better way of using your energy and intelligence in the service of God.'

	'St John, I have so many reasons for happiness. I am determined to be happy despite your scolding!'

	That week Hannah and I worked harder than we had ever worked in our lives before, but at last all was ready. It was a delight to see Diana's and Mary's faces when they arrived cold and stiff from their long journey, and saw the warm fires and polished furniture, and smelt the cakes and meat dishes cooking.

	We three spent the whole of Christmas week in perfect happiness. The air of the moors, the freedom of home, and the beginning of independence made Diana and Mary happier than I had ever seen them. Only St John remained apart from our conversations and laughter. He continued his serious studies, and spent much time visiting the sick as usual.

	'Do you still intend to be a missionary?' Diana asked him once, a little sadly.

	'Nothing has changed or will change my plans,' he answered. 'I shall leave England in a few months' time.'

	'And Rosamund Oliver?' asked Mary gently. 'Rosamund Oliver is engaged to a Mr. Granby, a very suitable young man, according to her father.' His face was calm. I realized he had managed to overcome what he called his weakness.

	Gradually our life at Moor House lost its holiday feeling, and as we took up our usual habits and regular studies again, St John sat with us more often. Sometimes I had the impression he was observing us. One day, when Diana and Mary were out and I was learning German, he suddenly said to me, 'I want you to learn Hindustani instead of German. I'll need it for my missionary work in India, and you could help me to learn it by studying with me. I've chosen you because I've noticed you have better powers of concentration than either of my sisters.' It seemed so important to him that I could not refuse, and when his sisters returned, they were surprised to find me learning Hindustani with St John.

	From now on we spent a lot of time together, studying. I had to work very hard to satisfy him. Under his influence, however, I felt I was losing my freedom to be myself. I could no longer talk or laugh freely, as I knew he only approved of serious moods and studies.

	I fell under his freezing spell, obeying all his commands without thinking.

	One evening, at bedtime, as he kissed his sisters good night, and was holding out his hand to shake mine, as usual, Diana said, laughing, 'St John! You aren't treating Jane like one of the family! You should kiss her too.' I was rather embarrassed, but St John calmly kissed me, and did so every evening after that.

	I had not forgotten Mr. Rochester in all these changes of home and fortune. His name was written on my heart, and would stay there as long as I lived. Not only had I written to ask Mr. Briggs more about him, I had also written twice to Mrs. Fairfax. But after I had waited in vain for six months, I lost hope, and felt low indeed. Diana said I looked ill, and needed a holiday at the seaside, but St John thought I ought to concentrate on more serious work, and gave me even more Hindustani exercises to do.

	One day, while he and I were walking on the moors, he announced, 'Jane, I'll be leaving in six weeks.'

	'You're doing God's work. He'll protect you,' I replied. 'Yes, it seems strange to me that all my friends don't want to join me. God offers a place in heaven to all who serve Him. What does your heart say to that, Jane?'

	'My heart is silent - my heart is silent,' I murmured. 'Then I must speak for it,' said the deep, stern voice. 'Jane, come with me to India as a missionary!'

	Was it a call from God? I felt as if I was under a terrible spell, and I trembled, afraid that I might not be able to escape.

	'Oh St John, don't choose me!' I begged. But it was useless appealing to a man who always did what he believed to be his duty, however unpleasant it was.

	'God intended you to be a missionary's wife,' he continued. Trust in Him, Jane. Marry me, for the service of God.'

	'I can't do it, St John, I'm not strong enough!' I cried. The iron bars of a cage seemed to be closing in around me.

	'I've seen how hard you can work, Jane. You will be a great help to me with Indian women, and in Indian schools.'

	I thought, 'Yes, I could do that. But I know that he doesn't love me, and despite that, he asks me to marry him!' So I said,

	'I'm ready to go with you to India, but as a sister, not as a wife.'

	He shook his head. 'You must see that's impossible. No, a sister could marry at any time, and leave me. I need a wife, who will obey me in life, and who will stay with me until death.'

	I trembled as I felt his power over me already. 'I'll give my heart to God,' I said. 'You don't want it.' As I looked at his stern face, I knew I could go anywhere in the world with him as a colleague, but I could never lose my freedom by marrying him.

	'I'll ask you again in a few days' time,' he said, 'and remember, it isn't me you're refusing, but God!'

	From then on his manner towards me was as cold as ice, which caused me great pain. I began to understand how, if I were his wife, this good, religious man could soon kill me, without feeling any guilt at all.

	When he asked me again, we were alone in the sitting-room. He put his hand on my head and spoke quietly in his deep, sincere voice. 'Remember, Jane, God calls us to work for Him, and will reward us for it. Say you will marry me, and earn your place in heaven!' I admired and respected him, and under his touch my mind was changing. I was tempted to stop struggling against him, as I had been tempted before, in a different way, by Mr. Rochester. The missionary gently held my hand. I could resist his anger, but not his gentleness. I desperately wanted to do what was right.

	'If I felt certain,' I answered finally, 'that God really wanted me to marry you, I would agree!'

	'My prayers are heard!' cried St John. Close together we stood, waiting for a sign from heaven. I was more excited than I had ever been before. There was a total silence in the house, and the room was full of moonlight. Suddenly my heart stopped beating, and I heard a distant voice cry, 'Jane! Jane! Jane!' - nothing more. Where did it come from? It was the voice of Edward Rochester, and it spoke in sadness and in pain.

	'I'm coming!' I cried. 'Wait for me!' I ran into the garden calling, 'Where are you?' Only the hills sent a faint echo back.

	I broke away from St John, who had followed, asking me questions. It was my time to give orders now. I told him to leave me, and he obeyed. In my room I fell to my knees to thank God for the sign he had sent me, and waited eagerly for daylight.



	CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR

	Returning to Thornfield

	In the morning I explained to Diana and Mary that I had to go on a journey, and would be away for several days. Although they did not know the reason for my journey, they were far too sensitive to my feelings to bother me with questions.

	And so I walked to Whitcross, the lonely crossroads on the moor, where I had arrived a year ago with no money or luggage. I took the coach, and after thirty-six hours of travelling I got down at Thornfield village, and almost ran across the fields in my hurry to see the well-known house again, and its owner. I decided to approach from the front, to get the best view of the house. From there I would be able to see my master's window. 'He might even be walking in the gardens,' I thought, 'and I could run to him, touch him! Surely that wouldn't hurt anybody?'

	But when I reached the great stone columns of the main gate, I stood still in horror. There, where I had hoped to see a fine, impressive house, was nothing but a blackened heap of stones, with the silence of death about it. No wonder that letters addressed to people here had never received an answer. There must have been a great fire. How had it started? Had any lives been lost? I ran back to the village to find answers to my questions.

	'Well, ma'am,' the hotel-owner told me, 'I was one of Mr. Rochester's servants at the time, and I can tell you it was his mad wife who started the fire in the governess's room. The master had been wildly in love with the governess, you see, ma'am, although she was just a plain little thing, and when she disappeared, he almost went mad. His wife must have understood enough to be jealous of the girl. Anyway, in the fire the master risked his life helping all the servants out of the house, then bravely went back to save the mad woman. We saw her jump from the roof and fall to her death. But because he went back to help her, he was badly injured in the fire, losing a hand and the sight of both eyes. Very sad, ma'am.'

	'Where is he now?' I asked urgently.

	'At another house of his, Ferndean Manor, thirty miles away.'

	I hired a carriage to drive there at once.



	CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE

	Finding Mr. Rochester again

	Ferndean Manor was a large old house in the middle of a wood. It looked dark and lonely, surrounded by trees. As I approached, the narrow front door opened, and out came a figure I could not fail to recognize, Edward Rochester. I held my breath as I watched, feeling a mixture of happiness and sadness. He looked as strong as before and his hair was still black, but in his face I saw a bitter, desperate look, that I had never seen there before. He walked slowly and hesitatingly along the path. Although he kept looking up eagerly at the sky, it was obvious that he could see nothing. After a while he stopped, and stood quietly there, the rain falling fast on his bent, uncovered head. Finally he found his way painfully back to the house, and closed the door.

	When I knocked at the door, Mr. Rochester's old servant, John, opened it and recognized me. He and his wife Mary were the only servants their master had wanted to keep when he moved from Thornfield. Although they were surprised to see me, I had no difficulty in arranging to stay at Ferndean that night.

	'But he may not want to see you,' warned Mary, as we sat together in the kitchen. 'He refuses to see anybody except us.' She was lighting some candles. 'He always wants candles in the sitting-room when it's dark, even though he's blind.'

	'Give them to me, Mary,' I said. 'I'll take them to him.' The blind man was sitting near the neglected fire in the dark room. 'Put down the candles, Mary,' he sighed.

	'Here they are, sir,' I said.

	'That is Mary, isn't it?' he asked, listening carefully. 'Mary's in the kitchen,' I answered.

	'What sweet madness has seized me?' he cried suddenly. 'Where is the speaker? I can't see, but I must feel, or my heart will stop, and my brain will burst! Let me touch you, or I can't live!' I held his wandering hand with both of mine. 'Is it Jane? This is her shape.' He released his hand and seized my arm, shoulder, neck, waist and held me close to him.

	'She is here,' I said, 'and her heart too. I am Jane Eyre. I've found you and come back to you.'

	'My living darling! So you aren't lying dead in a ditch somewhere! Is it a dream? I've dreamed so often of you, only to wake in the morning, abandoned, my life dark, my soul thirsty.'

	'I'm alive, and I'm not a dream. In fact, I'm an independent woman now. I've inherited five thousand dollars from my uncle.'

	'Ah, that sounds real! I couldn't dream that. But perhaps you have friends now, and don't want to spend much time in a lonely house with a blind man like me.'

	'I can do what I like, and I intend to stay with you, unless you object. I'll be your neighbour, your nurse, your housekeeper, your companion. You will never be sad or lonely as long as I live.'

	He did not reply immediately, and I was a little embarrassed by his silence. I had assumed he would still want me to be his wife, and wondered why he did not ask me.

	'Jane,' he said sadly, 'you cannot always be my nurse. It's kind and generous of you, but you're young, and one day you will want to marry. If I could only see, I'd try to make you love me again, but...' and he sighed deeply.

	I was very relieved to discover that was all he was worrying about, because I knew that his blindness made no difference at all to my love for him. However, I thought too much excitement was not good for him, so I talked of other things, and made him laugh a little. As we separated at bedtime, he asked me, 'Just one thing, Jane. Were there only ladies in the house where you've been?' I laughed, and escaped upstairs, still laughing. 'A good idea!' I thought. 'A little jealousy will stop him feeling so sorry for himself!'

	Next day I took him outside for a long walk in the fresh air. I described the beauty of the fields and sky to him, as we sat close together in the shade of a tree.

	'Tell me, Jane, what happened to you when you so cruelly abandoned me?' he asked, holding me tightly in his arms.

	And so I told him my story. Naturally he was interested in St John Rivers, my cousin.

	'This St John, do you like him?'

	'He's a very good man. I couldn't help liking him.'

	'He's perhaps a man of fifty or so?'

	'St John is only twenty-nine, sir.'

	'Rather stupid, I think you said? Not at all intelligent?'

	'He has an excellent brain, sir.'

	'Did you say he was rather plain, ugly, in fact?'

	'St John is a handsome man, tall and fair, with blue eyes.'

	Mr. Rochester frowned, and swore loudly.

	'In fact, sir,' I continued, 'he asked me to marry him.'

	'Well, Jane, leave me and go. Oh, until now I thought you would never love another man! But go and marry Rivers!'

	'I can never marry him, sir. He doesn't love me, and I don't love him. He's good and great, but as cold as ice. You needn't be jealous, sir. All my heart is yours.'

	He kissed me. 'I'm no better than the great tree hit by lightning at Thornfield,' he said. 'I can't expect to have a fresh young plant like you by my side, all my life.'

	'You are still strong, sir, and young plants need the strength and safety of a tree to support them.'

	'Jane, will you marry me, a poor blind man with one hand, twenty years older than you?'

	'Yes, sir.'

	'My darling! We'll be married in three days' time, Jane. Thank God! You know I never thought much of religion? Well, lately I've begun to understand that God has been punishing me for my pride and my past wickedness. Last Monday night, in a mood of deep depression, I was sitting by an open window, praying for a little peace and happiness in my dark life. In my heart and soul I wanted you. I cried out "Jane!" three times.'

	'Last Monday night, about midnight?' I asked, wondering.

	'Yes, but that doesn't matter. This is what's really strange. I heard a voice calling "I'm coming, wait for me!" and "Where are you?" And then I heard an echo sent back by hills, but there's no echo here, in the middle of the wood. Jane, you must have been asleep. Your spirit and mine must have met to comfort each other! It was your voice I heard!'

	I did not tell him I had actually spoken those words many miles away, at that exact moment on that night, because I could hardly understand how it happened myself.

	'I thank God!' said Edward Rochester, 'and ask Him to help me live a better life in future!' Together we returned slowly to Ferndean Manor, Edward leaning on my shoulder.

	We had a quiet wedding. I wrote to tell the Rivers the news. Diana and Mary wrote back with delighted congratulations, but St John did not reply.

	Now I have been married for ten years. I know what it is like to love and be loved. No woman has ever been closer to her husband than I am to Edward. I am my husband's life, and he is mine. We are always together, and have never had enough of each other's company. After two years his sight began to return in one eye. Now he can see a little, and when our first child was born and put into his arms, he was able to see that the boy had inherited his fine large black eyes.

	Mrs. Fairfax is retired, and Adele has grown into a charming young woman. Diana and Mary are both married, and we visit them once a year. St John achieved his ambition by going to India as planned, and is still there. He writes to me regularly. He is unmarried and will never marry now. He knows that the end of his life is near, but he has no fear of death, and looks forward to gaining his place in heaven.





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	Chapter one

	Jean Valjean

	One evening in October 1815, an hour before sunset, a man with a long beard and dusty, torn clothes walked into the town of Digne. He was in his late forties, of medium height, broad-shouldered and strong. A leather cap half-hid his face, which was sunburnt and shining with sweat. His rough yellow shirt was unbuttoned, revealing a hairy chest. On his back was a heavy soldier's bag, and in his hand was a large wooden stick.

	The townspeople, who had never seen him before, watched with interest as he stopped for water at a fountain. Children followed him to the marketplace, where he stopped for more water at another fountain. He then crossed the square towards an inn, and entered by the kitchen door.

	The innkeeper, who was also the cook, was busy with his pots and pans, preparing a meal for a group of travellers who were laughing and joking in the next room.

	'What can I do for you, Monsieur?' he asked without looking up.

	'A meal and a bed,' said the stranger.

	'Of course.' The innkeeper turned to look at him. Then, seeing the visitors rough appearance, he added, 'If you can pay for it.'

	'I have money.' The stranger produced an old leather purse from his jacket.

	'Then you're welcome,' the innkeeper said.

	The stranger smiled with relief and sat down by the fire. He did not see a young boy run out with a note that the innkeeper had quickly written. He did not see the boy return a short time later and whisper something to the innkeeper.

	'When will the meal be ready?' the stranger asked.

	'I'm sorry, Monsieur,' the innkeeper said. 'You can't stay here. I've got no free rooms.'

	'Then put me in a stable. All I need is a quiet corner somewhere. After dinner

	'You can't eat here either,' the innkeeper interrupted. 'I haven't enough food.'

	'What about all that food in the pots?'

	The innkeeper approached and, bending towards the man, said in a fierce whisper, 'Get out. I know who you are. Your name is Jean Valjean. You've just been released from prison. I can't serve people like you here.'

	The man rose without another word, picked up his bag and stick, and left. Outside, it was growing dark and a cold wind was blowing from the mountains in the east. The man looked around, desperate for somewhere to spend the night. He tried another inn, but the same thing happened. He knocked on the doors of people's houses, but news of his arrival had quickly spread and nobody would offer him shelter from the cold. He even tried sleeping in a garden, but was chased away by a dog. Finally, he found himself in the cathedral square. He shook his fist at the church and then, cold and hungry, he lay down on a stone bench by the doorway.

	A few minutes later, an old woman came out of the cathedral and saw him lying there.

	'What are you doing?' she asked.

	He answered angrily, 'Can't you see? I'm trying to sleep.'

	'On this bench, in this cold wind?'

	'I've slept for nineteen years on a piece of wood. Now it's stone. What's the difference?'

	'Why don't you go to an inn?'

	'Because I haven't any money,' he lied.

	The old woman opened her purse and gave him a few coins. Then she said, 'Have you tried everywhere?'

	'I've knocked at every door.'

	'What about that one over there?' she said, pointing across the square to a small house beside the bishop's palace.

	***

	The Bishop of Digne was a kind old man who, many years earlier, had given his palace to the town hospital. He lived a simple life with his sister, Mademoiselle Baptistine, and his old servant, Madame Magloire, and he was much loved by the people in the town. He trusted everyone. His doors were never locked, so that anybody who needed his help could find him easily.

	That evening, Mme Magloire was chatting with Mile Baptistine before serving the meal.

	'People say there's a stranger in town,' she said. 'The police say that he looks dangerous, and it would be better for everyone to lock their windows and doors.'

	'Brother.' Mile Baptistine turned to the bishop, who was sitting by the fire. 'Did you hear what Mme Magloire was saying?'

	'Something about a dangerous stranger walking the streets?' he asked with an amused smile.

	'This is no joke,' Mme Magloire said. 'The man is in rags and has an evil look on his face. Everybody in the town agrees that something terrible will happen tonight. And your sister agrees with me that this house isn't safe. If you like, I can make arrangements now to get a lock put on the door

	Before the bishop could reply, there was a heavy knock on the door.

	'Come in,' said the bishop.

	The door opened and Jean Valjean, the stranger, walked in. Mme Magloire trembled, open-mouthed with fear, while Mile Baptistine rose from her seat with alarm. The bishop, however, looked calmly at his unexpected visitor.

	'My name is Jean Valjean,' the stranger said before anybody could speak. 'I've been in prison for nineteen years. They let me out four days ago. I've been walking all day, and nobody in this town will give me food or a bed for the night. A woman saw me lying on a stone bench across the square and suggested that I come here. So here I am. What is this place? Is it an inn? I've got money. Will you let me stay?'

	'Mme Magloire,' said the bishop, 'will you please prepare another place at the table for this gentleman?'

	Valjean took a step forward. 'No, you don't understand,' he said. 'I've spent five years in prison for violent robbery, another fourteen years for trying to escape four times. I'm a dangerous man.'

	'Mme Magloire,' the bishop went on, 'you must put clean sheets on the bed in the spare room.'

	Mme Magloire, an obedient servant, left the room without protest.

	The bishop turned to the man. 'Sit down and warm yourself, Monsieur. Supper will soon be ready.'

	Jean Valjean's face, which had been hard and fierce, suddenly softened. 'You really mean it?' he asked, his voice trembling with childish excitement. 'You'll let me stay? I'm a dangerous criminal, but you called me "Monsieur". I don't believe it. May I ask your name, sir? Are you an innkeeper?'

	'I'm a priest,' said the bishop. 'And this is where I live.'

	'A priest?' Valjean said, sitting by the fire. 'So I don't have to pay?'

	'You can keep your money,' the bishop replied.

	During dinner, Mile Baptistine looked at Valjean kindly while the bishop talked about the local cheese-making industry. Valjean was so hungry that, at first, he paid no attention to anyone. Soon, however, he began to relax, and looked around the room. 'This is not the house of a rich man,' he thought. 'And the travellers in the inn eat better than this.' But then he looked at the table, and saw the beautiful silver candlesticks, knives and forks.

	After dinner, the bishop said goodnight to his sister, picked up one of the two candlesticks and, handing the other to his guest, said, 'I'll show you to your room, Monsieur.'

	Valjean followed the bishop upstairs into a bedroom. This was the bishop's bedroom. As he was following the bishop across the room, however, he noticed Mme Magloire putting the silver knives and forks in a cupboard by the bed.

	The bishop showed his guest into the spare room.

	'Sleep well,' he said. 'Before you leave tomorrow, you must have a bowl of warm milk from our cows.'

	Valjean was so tired that he fell asleep, fully-dressed, on top of the sheets, but he didn't sleep for long. When he woke up, the cathedral clock was striking two, but he had not woken because of this. He had woken because the bed was too comfortable; he had not slept in a proper bed for twenty years. Unable to return to sleep, he gazed into the darkness, thinking about the past twenty years. Life had been unjust to him, and he was angry. In 1795, he had lost his job as a tree-cutter. At that time he was looking after his sister, whose husband had died, and her seven children. Out of work, and with no food in the house, he had been arrested for trying to steal a loaf of bread. Now, at last, he was free, but he felt bitter and angry about his lost years. The world had been unfair to him, and he wanted revenge. Then, remembering the silver on the bishop's table, he had an idea.

	He sat up, swung his feet to the floor and slowly stood up. The house was silent. He moved carefully towards the window and looked out. The night was not very dark; there was a full moon, hidden from time to time by large clouds moving quickly across the sky. After studying the garden, he decided that escape would be easy. He turned back to the room, picked up his bag and took out a short iron bar, sharpened at one end. He then put his shoes into the bag and, grasping the iron bar in his right hand, he moved quietly towards the door of the bishop's bedroom. It was half-open. The bishop had not closed it.

	Valjean stood listening. There was no sound.

	He gave the door a gentle push and crept into the bedroom. Just as he reached the side of the bishop's bed, the moon came out from behind a cloud and filled the room with light. Valjean gazed down at the bishop's gentle, sleeping face, and felt a kind of terror. He had never before seen such peace, such kindness, such trust.

	He suddenly turned away and moved quickly to the cupboard. The first thing he saw when he opened the door was the basket of silver. He grabbed it, hurried back to the spare bedroom, picked up his stick and bag, climbed out of the window, emptied the silver into his bag and threw the basket into the garden. A minute later he climbed the garden wall and disappeared into the trees.

	Early the next morning, while the bishop was studying the flowers in his garden, Mme Magloire ran out of the house with a look of alarm on her face.

	'Monseigneur, do you know where the silver-basket is?'

	'Yes,' said the bishop. 'I found it in one of the flowerbeds.'

	'But it's empty!' she cried. 'Where's the silver?'

	'Oh, you're worried about the silver? I don't know where that is.'

	'Heaven save us, it's been stolen!' she cried. 'The man who came last night! He's run off with our silver!'

	The bishop, who had been bending sadly over a plant damaged by the basket, looked up and said gently, 'I think I was wrong to keep the silver for so long. It really belongs to the poor. I should have given it away a long time ago.'

	Later that morning, as the bishop and his sister were having breakfast, there was a knock on the door. Four men walked into the room. Three of them were policemen; the fourth was Jean Valjean.

	'Monseigneur... ' the sergeant in charge of the group began.

	Valjean raised his head with surprise. 'Monseigneur?' he repeated. 'I thought he was a priest.'

	'Silence,' said one of the policemen, 'This is the Bishop of Digne.'

	The bishop, meanwhile, had moved towards the group of men and was smiling at Jean Valjean.

	'I'm delighted to see you again, dear friend,' he said. 'But what about the candlesticks? I gave you those as well, don't you remember? They're silver like the rest, and worth at least two hundred francs. Did you forget to take them?'

	Jean Valjean's eyes widened with disbelief.

	'Monseigneur,' said the sergeant, 'do I understand that this man was telling the truth? We found this silver in his bag, and

	'And he told you,' the bishop finished the sentence for him, 'that an old priest had given it to him? Yes, he was telling the truth.'

	'So this man isn't a thief? 'The sergeant looked as surprised as Valjean.

	'Not at all. So you can let him go at once.'

	The policemen let go of Valjean's arms. He moved his feet nervously, uncertain of what to say at first. Then he murmured, 'Am I really free to go?'

	'Of course,' said the bishop. 'But this time, you mustn't forget your candlesticks.'

	He fetched them from a shelf and gave them to Valjean.

	'Now, go in peace,' he said softly.

	The policemen left, but Valjean did not move. He did not know what to think. The bishop walked up to him and said in a low voice, 'Don't forget that you've promised to use the money to make yourself an honest man.'

	Valjean, who did not remember having made such a promise, was silent.

	'Jean Valjean,' the bishop continued, 'I've bought your soul from the Devil, and have given it to God.'

	***

	Jean Valjean left the town and ran into the countryside, blindly following lanes and paths, not realizing that he was running in circles. He was filled with a strange kind of anger, but he did not know why. Finally, as evening fell, he sat on the ground, exhausted, and gazed across the fields at the distant mountains, wishing that he was back in prison. When he had been angry at the world, he had felt calm and sure of himself. But now, for the first time in twenty years, a man had shown him great kindness, and he did not know what to feel.

	Suddenly, he heard the sound of singing. A boy of about ten years old was coming along a footpath with a small box on his back and dirty knees showing through holes in his trousers. As he sang, he threw a coin into the air and caught it before it fell. Not noticing Jean Valjean sitting by the side of the path, he threw the coin higher into the air. This time, however, he did not catch it and it rolled along the ground towards Valjean, who immediately put his foot on it.

	The boy, unafraid, walked up to Valjean.

	'Please, Monsieur, may I have my coin?'

	'What's your name?' asked Valjean.

	'Petit-Gervais,' said the boy, smiling trustfully. 'I'm a chimney sweep, and that money is all I have.'

	'Go away,' said Valjean.

	'Please, Monsieur, that's my money.'

	Valjean lowered his head and did not reply.

	'My money!' the boy cried. 'My piece of silver! My coin!'

	Valjean seemed not to hear him. The boy seized his collar and shook him. 'I want my money!' he cried.

	Valjean slowly raised his head and stared with a sort of amazement at the child. Then, reaching for his stick, he said, 'Go to Hell!'

	The boy, suddenly afraid of the mad, fierce look in Valjean's eyes, turned and ran.

	Valjean stood for some time gazing emptily around him at the sunset and the shadows moving in on him. Suddenly he shivered, as if he had become aware for the first time of the icy wind. He bent down to pick up his bag but, as he did so, he caught sight of the silver coin, half-buried by his foot in the earth.

	It affected him like an electric shock. 'What's that?' he murmured. He stared at the coin with a look of puzzlement, as if he were trying to remember something. Then, with a sudden movement, he bent down and picked it up. He looked around but could see nothing in the darkness - just a purple mist rising slowly from the fields.

	He called the boy's name, but there was no reply. Within minutes he was running along the path, shouting. 'Petit-Gervais! Petit-Gervais!' There was still no reply.

	A short time later, he met a priest on horseback.

	'Have you seen a boy go by?' he asked.

	The priest shook his head. 'No. Why do you ask?'

	Valjean produced two five-franc pieces and gave them to the priest. 'This is for your poor, Monsieur. He was a boy of about ten, a chimney sweep. Monsieur, you must report me to the police. I'm a thief. I stole money from him. Here, let me give you more money

	But before Valjean could produce more coins, the priest rode away in terror.

	Valjean looked for the boy for another hour, running along the path, calling out his name, but with no success. Finally he stopped and sat, exhausted, on a rock. Then, his heart full of grief for what he had done, he buried his face in his hands and, for the first time in nineteen years, he cried.



	Chapter two

	Fantine

	On a spring evening in 1818, in the village of Montfermeil, not far from Paris, two little girls were playing on a swing outside a small inn. Their mother - a big, red-haired woman with a plain face - sat on the doorstep of the inn, watching them.

	'You have two very pretty children, Madame,' a voice said from close beside her.

	The woman looked round and saw a young woman with a child sleeping peacefully in her arms. The mother was young and pretty, but she looked poor and unhappy. She did not smile, and lines of sadness ran down the side of her pale cheeks. Her clothes were old and dirty, and she wore a tight, plain cap over her beautiful blonde hair.

	'Thank you,' said the woman. 'Why don't you sit down for a minute? You look tired. 'When the young woman had sat down next to her, the red-haired woman introduced herself. 'My name's Thenardier. My husband and I manage this inn.'

	'My names Fantine,' the young woman said. 'I used to work in Paris, but my husband died and I lost my job.' She could not tell Mme Thenardier the truth, which was that she had been made pregnant by a young man who had then abandoned her. 'I left Paris this morning to look for work in Montreuil,' she continued. 'My little girl walked some of the way, but she's very small. I had to carry her and she's fallen asleep.' As she spoke these words, she gave her daughter a loving kiss, which woke her up. The child's eyes were as wide and blue as her mother's. With a little laugh, she jumped off her mother's lap and ran to play with the two girls on the swing.

	'What's your little girl's name?' Mme Thenardier asked.

	'Euphrasie - but I call her Cosette. She's nearly three.'

	The two women watched the children playing together.

	'Children make friends very easily, don't they?' Mme Thenardier smiled. 'Look at them. They could easily be sisters.'

	At these words, Fantine did a very strange thing. She took Mme Thenardiers hand and said, 'Will you look after my daughter for me?'

	Mme Thenardier looked at Fantine thoughtfully, but said nothing.

	'I can't take her with me,' Fantine continued. 'I have to find work, and that's not easy with a child but no husband. As soon as I find a job, I'll come and fetch her. Will you do that for me? I could pay six francs a month.'

	Mme Thenardier still said nothing, but a man's voice from inside the house called, 'We'll take seven francs a month, and six months in advance.'

	Fantine agreed.

	'And another fifteen francs for extras,' called the man.

	'You will have them,' said Fantine, assuming that she was talking to Mme Thenardiers husband. 'I have eighty francs.'

	'Does the child have enough clothes?' the man asked.

	'She has some beautiful clothes,' Fantine replied. 'Plenty of everything and silk dresses like a lady. They're all in my bag.'

	The man's face finally appeared in the doorway.

	'Then we agree to look after her for you,' he said.

	The next morning, Fantine kissed her daughter goodbye and left for Montreuil, crying as if her heart would break.

	'This money will be useful,'Thenardier said to his wife. 'Now I can pay off all my debts and stay out of prison. I'm proud of you. You set a very clever trap.'

	'Without even intending to,' his wife replied.

	One month later, Thenardier was short of money again, so he took Cosette's beautiful silk clothes to Paris and sold them for sixty francs. The couple dressed Cosette in rags and gave her very little food, which they made her eat from a wooden bowl under the table. The dog and the cat, who ate with her, were her only companions.

	Fantine, meanwhile, found work in Montreuil and asked for news of her daughter every month. The Thenardiers always replied that she was in good health and very happy. At the end of the year, however, Thenardier was not happy with just seven francs a month; he demanded twelve and Fantine paid without protest, happy that her daughter was being well cared for.

	The Thenardiers, who were loving and gentle to their own daughters, Eponine and Azelma, treated Cosette like a slave.

	They made her get up before dawn every day and do all the dirty jobs around the house, while Eponine and Azelma wore pretty clothes and played with dolls. By the age of five, Cosette had become a thin, pale-faced, silent child. Misery had made her ugly and only her beautiful blue eyes remained.

	The Thenardiers did not feel guilty about treating Cosette badly because Fantine had stopped sending them regular payments.

	'The child is lucky to have a home at all,' they told everybody.

	'Without us, she'd be living on the streets.'

	***

	When Fantine first arrived in Montreuil, she had immediately found work in a factory. She rented a small room, sent money regularly to the Thenardiers and, for a short time, was almost happy. She forgot many of her problems, and dreamt only of Cosette and her plans for the future. But her happiness did not last long. Although she was careful to say nothing about her daughter to anyone, other women at the factory soon discovered her secret. An unmarried woman with a child was a terrible thing in those days, and Fantine lost her job. She tried to find work as a servant, but no one would employ her. She finally managed to earn a little money sewing shirts, but she was unable to send money regularly to the Thenardiers.

	That winter, Fantine saved money by not having a fire, and developed a small, dry cough. By the following winter, her debts had increased. The Thenardiers wrote her a frightening letter in which they told her that Cosette had no clothes, and that they needed ten francs immediately to buy her a new dress. Fantine, who did not have ten francs, but who was afraid that her daughter would freeze to death, went to the barber's shop. She took out her comb and let her blonde hair fall down to her waist.

	'Such beautiful hair!' the barber said.

	'How much will you give me for it?' Fantine asked.

	'Ten francs.'

	'Then cut it off.'

	After selling her hair to the barber, Fantine was able to buy a woollen dress, which she sent to the Thenardiers. The Thenardiers, however, were very angry - they had wanted money, not clothes. They gave the dress to their daughter, Eponine, and Cosette went on shivering.

	A few weeks later, Fantine received another letter from the Thenardiers. This time they wanted forty francs because Cosette was very ill and urgently needed medicine. Fantine felt desperate; she did not know how to obtain such a large sum of money. As she was wandering around the town, desperately trying to decide what to do, she noticed a crowd of people in the market square. She approached them without thinking, and discovered that they had gathered around a travelling dentist. Forgetting her troubles for a moment, she smiled at the dentist's humorous efforts to sell the people of Montreuil false teeth.

	Suddenly the dentist saw her.

	'You've got lovely teeth,' he said. 'If you sold me your two front teeth, I'd pay you forty francs.'

	Fantine ran home, upset and disgusted. 'My hair will grow again,' she thought, 'but teeth would be gone forever.' But then she thought about her daughter, and her own appearance suddenly seemed unimportant. That evening, she visited the dentist at the inn where he was staying, and allowed him to remove her teeth.

	Fantine could not sleep that night. She sat on her bed, cold and shivering, and looked at the two coins shining on the table. Then she gave a blood-stained smile. 'I'm happy,' she told herself. 'My baby isn't going to die.'

	Fantine earned less and less money from her sewing, and the Thenardiers demanded more and more money to look after Cosette. Fantine spent whole nights crying. What could she do? She had sold her hair and her teeth; what else could she sell? And then she decided that she had no other choice: she would have to sell herself.

	She became a prostitute.



	Chapter three

	Monsieur Madeleine

	One winter's evening, a toothless woman with a grey face and flowers in her hair was arrested for attacking a man in the street. She was taken to the police station, where Inspector Javert, the chief of police, sent her to prison for six months.

	'Please, M. Javert.' The woman fell to her knees. 'I owe a hundred francs. If I don't pay, my little girl will lose her home and be thrown out on to the streets. Please don't send me to prison.'

	Javert listened to her coldly, then ordered a policeman to take her away. While the policeman was trying to drag her to her feet, however, a voice from the shadows said, 'One moment please.'

	Javert looked up and saw Monsieur Madeleine, one of the most important people in the town.

	M. Madeleine had arrived mysteriously in Montreuil one December evening in 1815. He had no money but he had a revolutionary idea: he knew a cheap and efficient method of manufacturing glass. Within a few months of his arrival, thanks to his new idea, the glass-making factory in Montreuil was making enormous profits. With the money he made, M. Madeleine built two new factories, which provided the town with hundreds of new jobs. He became a very wealthy man but lived a simple life, using most of his money to build new hospitals and schools. He was so popular that, in 1820, the townspeople elected him mayor of Montreuil.

	There was one man, however, who did not like M. Madeleine. This was the chief of police, Inspector Javert.

	He had always been suspicious of M. Madeleine, and was sure that he had seen him somewhere before, many years earlier. But he kept his suspicions to himself, not daring to say what he really believed: that M. Madeleine was, in fact, a dangerous criminal with a terrible past.

	Now, years later, M. Madeleine was in the police station, trying to save Fantine from prison. Fantine, however, was not grateful. In fact, when she saw who it was, she spat at him.

	'You own the factory where I used to work!' she shouted at him. 'I lost my job because of you. Now I've become a bad woman, but what choice did I have? I'll never get my daughter back if I don't make money.'

	The mayor turned to Inspector Javert and said, in a soft, firm voice, 'This woman must be released.'

	'That's impossible,' Javert replied. 'She attacked a man in the street, a respectable citizen. And now I've just seen her spit at you, the mayor of our town. A woman like this deserves to be punished.'

	'But I saw what happened in the street just now,' M. Madeleine said. 'It was the man's fault, not this woman's. You should arrest him, not her.'

	Javert argued with M. Madeleine for some time, but finally gave in. He walked angrily out of the room, leaving the mayor and the prostitute alone together. Fantine trembled, as confused as Javert had been. The man who had just saved her from prison was also the man who had caused all her troubles. The devil had suddenly decided to be kind, and she did not know what to think.

	'I heard what you said,' M. Madeleine said to her. 'I honestly didn't know that you had lost your job, but I'll try to help you now. I'll pay your debts and arrange for your child to return to you. I'll give you all the money you need. I'll make you happy again. And I promise that, in the eyes of God, you have never been a bad woman.'

	Fantine gazed at M. Madeleine with tears in her eyes. After all her pain and suffering she had, for the first time in her life, found kindness in another human being. At last she would be cared for, and she could look forward to a life of happiness with Cosette. Without a word, she fell to her knees and kissed the back of M. Madeleine's hand.

	M. Madeleine sent the Thenardiers 300 francs and told them to send Cosette to Montreuil immediately. Thenardier, thinking that Fantine had suddenly become rich, wrote back and demanded 500 francs. M. Madeleine sent the money, but the Thenardiers found even more dishonest excuses for not sending Cosette back.

	***

	The weeks passed and, although she was happier than she had been for a long time, Fantine caught a fever. Months of poverty and misery had made her ill, and she soon became so weak that she was unable to leave her bed.

	'When shall I see Cosette?' she kept asking M. Madeleine when he visited her.

	'Very soon,' he would reply, and her pale face would light up with joy.

	One morning, as M. Madeleine was making preparations to leave for Montfermeil and to fetch Cosette himself, he had a visitor. Inspector Javert walked into his office, and stood in silence waiting for him to look up from his work.

	'Well, Javert, what is it?' M. Madeleine finally said.

	'I've come to apologize, M. Madeleine,' the inspector replied.

	'What are you talking about?'

	'I've treated you unjustly. I was angry with you six weeks ago when you told me to release that woman. I wrote to the police headquarters in Paris and told them about you.'

	'Told them what about me?'

	'Forgive me, M. Madeleine, but I believed you were a man called Jean Valjean. He was a prisoner I saw twenty years ago, when I worked at a prison in Toulon. After being released from prison, this Valjean stole some silver from the Bishop of Digne and robbed a small boy on a public footpath. We tried to catch him, but he disappeared. When you arrived in Montreuil, I felt sure that you were this man, but now I know I was wrong, and I'm sorry. You will, of course, dismiss me from my job, as I've shown that I don't deserve your trust.'

	M. Madeleine, looking hard at Javert without expression, said quietly, 'I'm afraid I don't understand.'

	'The police headquarters in Paris told me that Jean Valjean was arrested last autumn for stealing apples,' Javert explained. He'd changed his name to Champmathieu and had lived for several years in the village of Ailly-le-Haut-Cloche. Two ex-prisoners from Toulon recognized him as Jean Valjean. I visited the man in Arras prison, and I saw for myself that he is indeed Jean Valjean. Of course, he denies everything, but that's not surprising. If he's found guilty of stealing from the bishop - who, as you know, died a couple of years ago - and of robbing the small boy, he'll spend the rest of his life in prison.'

	M. Madeleine looked down at his papers.

	'This matter is of no interest to me, Javert,' he said casually. 'I'm sure you have other work to do.'

	'I was going to the man's trial in Arras tomorrow, 'Javert said. 'But after this conversation, you must dismiss me.'

	M. Madeleine rose to his feet.

	'Javert,' he said, 'you're an honourable man. You made one small mistake, that's all. I want you to continue your excellent work as inspector of police.'

	He offered Javert his hand, but the inspector refused to take it. Instead, he said, 'I've behaved unjustly towards an innocent man. I cannot shake his hand.'

	With those words he bowed and left the office, leaving M. Madeleine to stare at the papers on his desk with an empty, puzzled look in his eyes.

	That afternoon, M. Madeleine visited Fantine. She had a high fever, and was coughing badly, but she still had only one thing on her mind.

	'Cosette?' she asked him.

	'Very soon,' he assured her.

	He sat by her bed for an hour and then, having told the nurses to look after her, he returned to his home. He stayed awake all night, thinking of Javert's story about Champmathieu. The reader has probably already realized that M. Madeleine was really Jean Valjean, and M. Madeleine - as we shall continue to call him for this part of the story - knew that he could not let Champmathieu go to prison for crimes he had not committed. He knew - although he was not happy to admit this - that he would have to go to Arras and tell the truth. He would lose everything that he had worked so hard to achieve. He would also have to break his promise to Fantine about bringing Cosette from Montfermeil. But what choice did he have? The truth was more important than anything else.

	***

	The next morning, M. Madeleine set off on the long journey to Arras. It took him more than twelve hours, and when he arrived, he discovered that Champmathieu's trial had already started. The courtroom was full but, because he was such an important man, M. Madeleine was allowed to sit behind the judge's chair. He watched as several witnesses swore on the Bible that the man standing before the judge was Jean Valjean. Champmathieu, a large, simple-minded man, denied everything when his chance came to speak, but the crowd thought he was trying to be funny. The courtroom filled with laughter and Champmathieu began to laugh himself, which did him no good at all.

	Finally, having heard all the evidence, the judge called for silence. He was preparing to announce his decision when M. Madeleine, pale and trembling, stood up and said:

	'That man is not Jean Valjean.'

	An excited whisper went around the courtroom as everybody recognized M. Madeleine.

	M. Madeleine waited for the whispers to stop before announcing in a loud, clear voice that he was Jean Valjean. At first, no one believed him, but he managed to persuade the court by skilfully questioning each of the witnesses, revealing personal information that only the real Jean Valjean could have known. When he had persuaded the court of the truth of his confession, he was faced with a shocked but respectful silence.

	'I must leave now,' M. Madeleine finally said. 'I have important business to attend to. You know where to find me, and I shall not try to escape.'

	Everybody stood to one side to let him pass as he made his way towards the door. When he had gone, the judge immediately allowed Champmathieu to leave the court a free man. Champmathieu went home in a state of total confusion, thinking all men mad and understanding nothing of what had happened.

	***

	At dawn the next day, M. Madeleine entered Fantine's room.

	'How is she?' he asked the nurse, who was watching her as she slept.

	'She seems better. She's looking forward to seeing her child.'

	'I haven't brought the child with me,' M. Madeleine said.

	'Then what can we say to her when she wakes up?' The nurse looked suddenly worried. 'It will destroy her if she doesn't see her child now, after you promised to bring her.'

	'God will guide me,' M. Madeleine sighed.

	For some time M. Madeleine sat by the bedside and watched Fantine while she slept. She was breathing with great difficulty, but her face looked peaceful and calm. Suddenly, she opened her eyes and saw M. Madeleine.

	'Cosette?' she asked, with a soft smile.

	'Later,' M. Madeleine said gently, taking her hand. 'You're too weak to see her at the moment. First you must get well.'

	Fantine smiled, and began to talk dreamily about her future life with her daughter, and how happy they would be together. But suddenly her face froze, and she stared with horror at the door. M. Madeleine, who was holding her hand, turned and saw Inspector Javert. Fantine, thinking that the inspector had come for her, gripped M. Madeleine's hand tightly and begged him to protect her.

	'Don't be afraid.' M. Madeleine tried to calm her. 'He hasn't come for you.' Then, gently rising from his chair, he moved towards Javert. 'I know what you've come for,' he said quietly so that Fantine wouldn't hear. 'But give me three days, please. That's all I ask. Three days to fetch this unfortunate woman's child. I'll pay anything you like.'

	'Do you think I'm stupid?' Javert gave an unpleasant laugh. 'Three days to escape, you mean.'

	Fantine, who had heard what M. Madeleine said, despite his efforts to speak quietly, began to tremble.

	'To fetch my child?' she cried. 'Isn't she here? Nurse, answer me... where's my little Cosette? I want to see her. M. Madeleine

	'Be quiet, you dirty prostitute,' Javert interrupted her angrily. 'There is no Monsieur Madeleine. This man's name is Jean Valjean, and he's a criminal no better than you are. And you can forget all that nonsense about your child.

	Fantine suddenly sat up. She stared wildly at the two men, then turned to the nurse. She looked as if she was going to speak, but no words came from her lips. Instead, with a small sigh, she fell back against her pillow and lay completely still.

	Jean Valjean (as we must now call him) shook Javert's hand from his collar and ran to the bed. He gazed into Fantine's eyes and knew immediately that she was dead.

	'You've killed her!' he cried angrily, turning to Javert with a fierce look in his eyes.

	'I didn't come here to argue,' Javert said, stepping back nervously, afraid that Valjean was going to attack him. 'If you don't come with me now, I'll have to call my men.'

	Valjean looked around the room, thinking for a second of making his escape. But the idea did not last for long. He turned again to Fantine and looked for one last time at her sad, pale face and empty, blue eyes. Bending down, he closed her eyes and pressed his lips against her forehead. Then he rose and turned back to Javert.

	'I'm ready now,' he said.

	News of M. Madeleine's arrest spread quickly around the town. Most people pretended not to be surprised. 'We always knew there was something strange about him,' they said. Two days after his arrest, Jean Valjean escaped from prison. The bars of his window had been broken during the night. Again, most people pretended not to be surprised. 'It takes more than a small town prison to hold a man as strong as that,' they all agreed.



	Chapter four

	The Man in the Long Yellow Coat

	Christmas 1823 was especially lively and colourful in the village of Montfermeil. Entertainers and traders from Paris set up their stalls in the streets, and business at the Thenardiers' inn was very good. While guests and visitors ate and drank noisily, Cosette - now eight years old - sat in her usual place under the kitchen table. Dressed in rags, she knitted woollen stockings for Eponine and Azelma.

	One evening, Madame Thenardier ordered Cosette out into the cold to fetch water. The nearest water supply was half-way down the wooded hill on which Montfermeil stood, and Cosette hated fetching water, especially in the dark. Miserably, she picked up a large, empty bucket that was almost as big as she was, and was walking with it to the door when Madame Thenardier stopped her.

	'Buy some bread on the way,' she said, giving the girl some money.

	Cosette took the coin, put it carefully in her pocket and left. She was cold and hungry as she dragged the bucket behind her along the crowded street, but she could not resist stopping in front of one of the stalls. It was like a palace to her, with its bright lights, shining glass and pretty objects. But the object that most attracted Cosette's attention was a large, golden-haired doll in a beautiful long pink dress. All the children in Montfermeil had gazed with wonder at this doll, but nobody in the village had enough money to buy it.

	Cosette gazed at the doll for several minutes but, remembering her job, she sighed and continued on her way. She had soon left the colourful lights and the happy laughter of the village behind her, and was running down the hill into the frightening darkness of the wood. Finding the stream, she bent forward and began to till her bucket. She did not notice the coin that Mme Thenardier had given her for the bread fall out of her pocket into the water. When the bucket was full, she gripped the handle with her tiny, frozen hands and tried to pull it back up the hill. But the bucket was so heavy that, after a dozen steps, she had to stop for a rest. She managed a few more steps, and stopped again. Her progress became slower and slower. She was almost at the end of her strength, and she was still not out of the wood. Leaning against a tree, she cried aloud:

	'Oh God help me! Please, dear God!'

	Suddenly, an enormous hand reached down from the sky and took the bucket of water from her. Looking up, Cosette saw a huge, white-haired man standing next to her. He looked very strange with his tall black hat and long yellow coat.

	'This is a very heavy bucket for such a small child,' he said gently, looking down at her from his great height.

	For some reason, Cosette was not afraid. There was something about his eyes, tilled with a strange sadness, that she liked and trusted. She let him carry the bucket up the hill and, as they walked back towards the village, she told him everything about her life with the Thenardiers. The old man listened with great interest, and asked her many questions.

	As they were approaching the inn, Cosette turned to him and said, 'May I have the bucket now? If Mme Thenardier sees that someone has been helping me, she'll beat me.'

	The old man gave her the bucket, and they entered the inn together.

	'What took you so long?' Mme Thenardier said angrily when she saw the little girl.

	'This gentleman wants a room for the night,' Cosette said, trembling with fear, expecting to be beaten.

	Mme Thenardier glanced at the old man without interest. She could tell from his clothes that he probably had no money.

	'I'm sorry, the rooms are full,' she said.

	'I can pay the price of a room,' the old man said.

	'Forty sous,' Mme Thenardier replied (although the usual price was twenty).

	'Forty sous,' the man agreed.

	He sat down and Cosette, after serving him some wine, returned to her place under the table. But before she could start her knitting, she heard Mme Thenardier's angry voice demanding, 'Where's the bread I told you to get?'

	Cosette, who had forgotten about the bread, came out from under the table.

	'The baker's was shut,' she lied.

	'Well, give me back the money.'

	Cosette felt in her pocket and suddenly went pale. The coin was not there.

	'I'm waiting,' Mme Thenardier said threateningly.

	Cosette said nothing, speechless with fear as the woman raised her arm to hit her. But before she could deliver the blow the old man, who had seen everything, interrupted her.

	'Madame, I've just noticed this on the floor. It must have fallen from the child's pocket.'

	Mme Thenardier took the coin the old man held towards her and walked away.

	At that moment the door opened and Eponine and Azelma appeared. They were two healthy girls, the old man noticed, dressed in warm clothes and with pink, healthy cheeks. After hugging and kissing their mother, they sat on the floor by the fire and played with a doll. Cosette, who had returned to her place under the table, looked up from her knitting and watched them sadly. A short time later, the girls grew bored with their game. They left the doll on the floor and went off to play with a baby cat. Cosette, checking that no one was watching, reached out and picked up the doll. She turned her back on the room and began to play with it, hoping that no one could see what she was doing. Her happiness did not last long, however. The two girls, when they saw Cosette with their doll, ran crying to their mother. Mme Thenardier rushed across the room towards Cosette who, afraid that she would be punished, put the doll gently on the floor and began to cry.

	'What's the matter?' the old man said, rising to his feet.

	'Can't you see?' Mme Thenardier said, red with anger. 'That nasty little girl, who isn't even my own daughter, who I feed and look after out of the kindness of my heart, has been playing with my daughters' doll.'

	'I don't understand,' the old man said.

	'She's touched it with her dirty hands!' Then, hearing Cosette crying, she turned to the little girl and shouted, 'Stop that noise!'

	The old man left the inn and, minutes later, returned with something in his hands: the beautiful doll from the stall across the road.

	'Here,' he said softly, placing it gently on the floor in front of Cosette. 'It's for you.'

	There was a sudden silence in the room. Mme Thenardier, Eponine and Azelma stood absolutely still. The drinkers at the other tables paused, glasses half-way to their lips, and stared with disbelief.

	'What kind of man is this?' they thought. 'He dresses so poorly but can afford to buy the most expensive doll in Montfermeil!'

	The Thenardiers gave the old man their best room for the night. The next morning they gave him the bill, charging him three times the usual price for a meal and a bed for the night. They waited nervously while the man studied the bill carefully, expecting him to complain or cause trouble. Finally, he looked up from the bill without expression and said, 'Tell me, is business good here in Montfermeil?'

	'Times are very hard,' Mme Thenardier replied immediately. 'This is a poor country. I don't know how we would manage without the occasional rich and generous traveller like yourself. We have so many expenses. That child, for instance - you've no idea how much she costs. We have our own daughters to look after. I can't afford to look after other people's children, too.'

	'What would you say,' the old man said after a moment's thought, 'if I offered to take the child from you?'

	'Oh!' Madame Thenardiers face brightened. 'That would be wonderful.'

	'Just a minute,' her husband said. 'We love that child very much. It's true we're poor, and we have bad debts, but love is more important than money.'

	'How much do you need?' the old man asked, taking an old leather wallet from the pocket of his coat.

	'1500 francs,' Thenardier, who had already done his arithmetic, replied.

	The old man put three 500-franc notes on the table and said, without smiling, 'Now fetch Cosette.'

	When Cosette came downstairs, the old man gave her new clothes to wear: a black woollen dress, black stockings, scarf and shoes. Half an hour later, the people of Montfermeil saw an old man in a tall hat and long yellow coat walking along the road to Paris, hand-in-hand with a little girl dressed completely in black. No one knew the man. And, because she was carrying an expensive doll and was no longer wearing rags, not many recognized Cosette.

	Cosette was leaving at last. She did not know where to, or with whom. But, as she held the old man's hand, she gazed wide-eyed at the sky. She had the strange but comforting feeling that she was somehow travelling closer to God.



	Chapter four

	Valjean and Cosette

	Somewhere on the outskirts of Paris, Jean Valjean stopped outside a large, ancient building with damp walls. He took a key from the pocket of his long yellow coat and opened the old wooden door. He then carried Cosette, who was sleeping in his arms, along a dark corridor and up some stairs to the room he had rented since his escape from Montreuil. There was not much furniture in the room - just an old bed, a mattress on the floor, a table, some chairs and a lighted stove. A streetlamp shone through the only window, lighting the dark interior of the room.

	Valjean laid Cosette on the bed without waking her. He lit a candle and sat by the bed, watching her while she slept. He felt sad that Fantine had not lived to see her child again, but happy that he had been able to rescue her child from the terrible Thenardiers. He bent and kissed the sleeping child's forehead just as, nine months earlier, he had kissed her mother's.

	The next morning, Cosette opened her eyes and immediately started to get out of bed.

	'I'm coming, Madame,' she yawned, blinded by the bright winter's sunlight that was shining into the room.

	Then, as her eyes adjusted to the light, she saw the kind old face of Jean Valjean looking down at her, and she relaxed.

	'Of course!' she cried with joy. 'It's all true. I was afraid that it was just a dream.'

	She hugged her doll and asked Valjean hundreds of questions. Finally, she asked him, 'Do you want me to sweep the floor?'

	'No,' he said. 'I just want you to enjoy yourself.'

	The December days passed in great happiness for Cosette and for Jean Valjean, too. For twenty-five years he had been alone in the world. Nothing had ever touched his heart until he had rescued Cosette. Now, he discovered the greatest joy he had ever known by just standing beside her bed and looking at her innocent, trusting little face. He had discovered love.

	***

	After escaping from Montreuil, Jean Valjean had taken all his money from the bank and buried it in a forest near Montfermeil. Although he was rich, he had chosen a room in a poor part of Paris, where nobody would find him. His only neighbour was an old woman, who did his housework and kept his stove burning. Paying her six months in advance, he told her that he was a ruined Spanish gentleman, and that the little girl was his granddaughter.

	Weeks passed, and the two lived happily. Valjean gave Cosette lessons in reading and writing, and spent hours watching her as she dressed and undressed her doll. To avoid being seen, he never went out during the day. He walked for a couple of hours every evening, sometimes alone, sometimes with Cosette. He often gave money to beggars, which was unwise, because he soon became known in the area as 'the beggar who gives money to beggars'.

	One evening, towards the end of winter, Valjean gave some money to a beggar sitting under a streetlamp outside a church. The beggar raised his face and stared hard at Valjean for just a second, then quickly bowed his head. This gave Valjean a shock. Although he had only seen the beggar's face for a second, it had seemed strangely familiar.

	'I'm going mad,' he thought, as he walked home.

	The next evening he returned to the steetlamp outside the church. The beggar was still there, in the same position, wearing the same clothes. This time, Valjean spoke to him as he gave him some money. The beggar laughed and joked with him, and Valjean returned that evening a happier man.

	'I must have been dreaming yesterday,' he laughed to himself. 'But for a second, there was something about the beggars eyes that reminded me of Javert. How could I have thought such a thing? After speaking to him this evening, I can see that he doesn't look like the inspector at all.'

	A few evenings later, while he was giving Cosette a reading lesson in his room, Valjean heard the front door of the house open and close. This was unusual. The old woman, the only other person who lived in the building, always went to bed before nightfall. Valjean signalled to Cosette to keep quiet. Someone was coming up the stairs. He blew out the candle and, just as he was kissing Cosette on the forehead, the footsteps stopped. Valjean did not move. He sat in his chair with his back to the door and held his breath. A few minutes later, having heard only silence, he turned round. A light was shining through a crack in his door. Someone with a candle was standing outside his room.

	Several minutes passed, and then the light disappeared. Valjean quietly lay down on the mattress on his floor, but he could not close his eyes all night. At daybreak, as he was falling asleep at last, he heard footsteps in the corridor outside his room again. Running to the door, he put his eye to the large keyhole and saw the back view of a man who was walking towards the stairs. A tall man in a long coat with a stick under his arm.

	Valjean's heart almost stopped beating and he began to sweat.

	'Javert,' he breathed to himself.

	***

	Valjean spent all day making preparations to leave. It was too dangerous for him and Cosette to stay there another night. That evening, he went downstairs and looked up and down the street. It seemed empty, although he could not see into the shadows behind the trees. He went back upstairs for Cosette, who was waiting for him patiently, holding her doll.

	'Come along,' he said. 'It's time to leave.'

	Cosette took his hand, and went with him down the stairs.

	There was a full moon, and this pleased Valjean as he moved quickly along the narrow streets. By keeping close to the walls in the shadows, he could clearly see what was happening in the light. After a while, he felt confident that he and Cosette were not being followed. But, as the church bells of the city struck eleven o'clock, something made him look back. In the light of a lamp above a doorway, he saw four men moving along the street in his direction. He gripped Cosette's hand and began to walk more quickly. Every few minutes, he stopped in the shadows of a doorway or at the corner of a street to look back. The four men were still following him. He could see their faces clearly in the moonlight, and one of them belonged to Inspector Javert.

	By now, Cosette was exhausted. Valjean picked her up and ran with her through a confusing system of alleys until he came to a bridge. On the other side of the river, he stopped at the entrance of a high-walled alley and looked back. He could see four figures in the distance on the far side of the bridge.

	Walking more slowly now, thinking he was safe from his pursuers, Valjean followed the alley until he came to a lane that seemed to lead away from the city. He walked along this lane for a long time until, to his horror, he discovered his way blocked by a high wall. There was no way forward, but as he was turning back, he saw movements in the distance and the flash of moonlight on metal. Seven or eight soldiers were moving slowly along the lane in his direction.

	Valjean looked desperately for an escape from the alley, but could see none. On one side of him was a tall building, all its doors and windows covered with metal bars. On the other side there was a wall, higher than a tree. He would be able to climb the wall on his own, but how could he carry Cosette? Suddenly, he had an idea. He ran to a nearby streetlight and pulled some wire from a metal box at its base. He tied one end of the wire around Cosette's waist, climbed the wall and, with great difficulty, pulled the girl up behind him. He was only just in time. There was a tree on the other side of the wall, and Valjean carried Cosette down into its branches just as the soldiers arrived.

	'He must be here!' He heard Javert's voice clearly on the other side of the wall. 'He can't have escaped. There's no way out!'

	At last, the soldiers gave up their search and went back in the direction they had come. Valjean hugged Cosette tightly with relief, knowing that at last they were both safe.



	Chapter six

	Marius

	On the night after the Battle of Waterloo, in June 1815, a robber moved quietly around the battlefield, stealing money and jewellery from the bodies of dead soldiers. He saw a hand sticking out from a pile of dead men and horses, a gold ring on its middle finger, shining in the moonlight. The robber took the ring but, as he turned to leave, the hand grabbed his jacket. The robber pulled the body from the pile of bodies and saw that he had rescued a French officer. The man had a terrible wound in his head, but he was still alive.

	'Thank you,' the officer whispered. 'You've saved my life. What's your name?'

	'Thenardier,' the robber replied.

	'I shall not forget that name,' the officer replied. 'And you must remember mine. My name's Pontmercy.'

	Without another word, the robber took the wounded man's watch and purse, and disappeared into the night.

	Georges Pontmercy was married with a young son. He survived the Battle of Waterloo but unfortunately, in the same year, his wife died. His father-in-law, M. Gillenormand, was a very wealthy man, but the two men hated each other. M. Gillenormand hated everybody who liked Napoleon. He thought that Pontmercy was no better than a beggar, a penniless adventurer who only wanted his money. Pontmercy thought that M. Gillenormand was an old fool. When his daughter died, M. Gillenormand made Pontmercy an offer which he could not refuse.

	'You have no money, and I am rich,' he said. 'If you want to keep your son, Marius, I'll give you no money. But if you give the boy to me, and promise never to see him again, I'll look after him.'

	Pontmercy, wanting his son to have a good life, had sadly given him to M. Gillenormand and never saw his son or father-in-law again.

	Marius grew up with his grandfather, and never knew his father. M. Gillenormand always told him that his father had been no good - that he was a poor soldier and a drunk who had abandoned him after his mother's death. For many years, Marius believed this, but when he was seventeen years old, he learnt the truth. His father, a brave officer who had fought for Napoleon and nearly died at the Battle of Waterloo, had really loved him and his mother very much. Without telling his grandfather, Marius tried to contact his father and finally discovered where he was living. He went at once to visit him, but he was too late. His father had just died. A poor man, Georges Pontmercy had left his son nothing apart from a letter:

	For my son. My life was saved at Waterloo by a sergeant. His name was Thenardier. I believe that he recently managed a small inn in the village of Montfermeil, not far from Paris. If you ever find this man, I want you to help him in any way you can.

	Marius returned to Paris, but continued to visit his father's grave regularly, without telling his grandfather. One day, however, his grandfather discovered what he was doing. They had a big quarrel, and M. Gillenormand ordered Marius to leave his house.

	***

	For the next three years, Marius lived in a small room in an old, damp-walled building on the outskirts of Paris - the same room that Valjean and Cosette had lived in eight years earlier. He gave up studying law and earned his living by working in a bookshop and helping to write dictionaries. He did not earn very much money, but it was enough for the rent and simple meals. He rarely bought new clothes, but he was proud of the fact that he had never been in debt. His grandfather often tried to send him money, but Marius always returned it. He hated his grandfather for the unjust, cruel way he had treated his poor father. Life was hard for him, but he never forgot the promise he had made his father: that he would find Thenardier, the man who had saved his father's life, and help him in any way he could.

	Marius was a handsome young man, but he was also extremely shy. When girls looked at him and smiled, he thought they were laughing at his old clothes. In fact, they were attracted by his good looks, but he was not confident enough to realize this. As a result, he had no girlfriend, but he was happy with his books.

	'You shouldn't stay alone all the time,' his good friend, Enjolras, said to him. 'You should get out more. Give the girls a chance. They'd be good for you, Marius. Otherwise you'll turn into a priest!'

	Marius paid little attention to his friend, and continued his quiet life of work, study and daily walks.

	While walking around his part of the city, Marius had noticed in elderly man and a young girl in the Luxembourg Gardens. They always sat next to each other on the same bench. The man, who was perhaps sixty, had white hair and a serious but friendly-looking face. The girl, who was aged thirteen or fourteen, always wore the same badly-cut black dress. She was very thin, almost ugly, but Marius noticed that she had lovely blue eyes. They seemed to be father and daughter.

	Marius saw this couple frequently on his regular walks in the Gardens. But, although he was very interested in them, they seemed not to notice him at all. The girl was always talking happily, while the man said very little. He just looked at the girl from time to time with an affectionate, fatherly smile.

	Enjolras had often seen the couple, too.

	'Do you know who they are?' Marius asked him one day.

	'I call the man M. Leblanc, because of his white hair, and the girl Mile Lanoire, because of her black dress,' his friend replied.

	***

	For almost a year, Marius saw the old man and the young girl daily in the same place at the same time. Then, for some reason, Marius stopped going to the Luxembourg Gardens. When he returned, one summer morning six months later, he saw the same couple sitting on the same bench, but something amazing had happened. The man was the same, but the thin, plain girl of six months earlier had become a beautiful young woman. Her rough black dress had been replaced by one of fine black silk. She had soft brown hair, pale, smooth skin, deep blue eyes and a lovely smile that lit up her face like sunshine.

	She looked up when Marius passed for the second time, and gave him a casual glance. Marius, however, walked on, thinking of other things. For the next few days he passed the bench in the Gardens without looking at her. Then one day, as he was passing, thinking about nothing in particular, the girl looked up at him and their eyes met. A second later she looked away and Marius walked on but, in a strange way, he knew his life had changed. What he had experienced in that moment was not the honest, innocent gaze of a child. It was something more than that. Whatever it was, Marius sensed that, after that moment, his life would never be the same.

	The next day, Marius returned to the Luxembourg Gardens wearing his best clothes. He walked around slowly, stopping to look at the ducks on the lake, then casually approached the bench where Mile Lanoire and her father were sitting. As he walked past, he kept his eyes fixed on the girl, but she did not seem to notice him. She was talking quietly to her father, and Marius could hear the soft, exciting murmur of her voice. Without intending to, he stopped, turned round and walked past the bench again. He felt his face go red and his heart beat loudly in his chest. He was sure, this time, that she had watched him as he passed. He did not go back a third time, but sat down on a bench at the opposite end of the Gardens. He looked at the girl out of the corner of his eye. She seemed to fill the far end of the Gardens with a kind of blue mist. Taking a deep breath, he rose and was going to pass the bench for a third time when he stopped. He suddenly realized that, in his feverish state, he had forgotten about the old man. What would he be thinking when he saw a strange young man walking backwards and forwards in front of his bench? Without another thought, Marius left the Gardens and went home.

	He returned the next morning and sat on a bench all day, pretending to read a book, not daring to go near the bench where the girl and her father were sitting. He did the same every day for two weeks. Towards the end of the second week, while Marius was sitting in his usual place, he looked up from his book. And his face went pale. Something had happened at the far end of the Gardens. M. Leblanc and his daughter had risen from their bench and were slowly walking in his direction. Marius shut his book, opened it again and made an effort to read. When he felt that they were near him, he looked up and saw that the girl was looking steadily at him with a soft, thoughtful gaze that made him tremble from head to foot.

	He gazed after her until she had disappeared from sight, then rose to his feet and walked around, laughing and talking to himself. Finally he left the Gardens in the mad hope of seeing her in the street, but instead he met Enjolras, who invited him to a meal.

	Every day for the next month, Marius went to the Luxembourg Gardens, excited by knowing that the girl was secretly looking at him, but too shy and embarrassed to know what to do. He avoided walking directly in front of the bench, partly from shyness, partly because he did not want to attract her father's attention. Sometimes he stood for half an hour in a place where her father could not see him, looking at her and enjoying the small, secret smiles she sent him.

	But it seemed that M. Leblanc had begun to suspect what was happening because often, when Marius appeared, he got to his feet and walked away, taking his daughter with him. Sometimes M. Leblanc took his daughter to a different bench, to see if Marius would follow them. Marius failed to understand the trick, and made the mistake of doing so. Then M. Leblanc became irregular in his visits and did not always bring his daughter with him. When this happened, Marius did not stay in the Gardens, which was another mistake.

	Marius was too much in love to think clearly. His desire for the girl was growing daily, and he dreamt of her every night. One evening, he found a handkerchief lying on the bench which M. Leblanc and his daughter had just left. It was a plain, white handkerchief with the initials U.F. in one corner.

	'Ursula.' Marius said the first name that came into his head. 'A delicious name!'

	He kissed the handkerchief, breathed in its perfume, wore it next to his heart by day and kept it under his pillow at night.

	'I can feel her whole soul in it!' he told himself

	In fact, the handkerchief belonged to M. Leblanc and had simply fallen out of his pocket, but Marius was unaware of this. He never appeared in the Luxembourg Gardens without the handkerchief pressed to his lips or his heart. The girl could not understand his behaviour at all, and looked at him with a puzzled expression.

	'Such modesty!' Marius sighed.

	Eventually, Marius was not satisfied with just knowing the girl's name; he wanted to know where she lived. He found that she lived in a small house at the quiet end of the rue de l'Ouest. As well as the joy of seeing her in the Gardens, he now had the pleasure of following her home. One evening, having followed them to the house and watched them enter, he went in after them and spoke to the concierge. The concierge, however, became suspicious, thinking that Marius was connected with the police, and refused to say anything.

	The following day, M. Leblanc and his daughter did not come to the Gardens at all. They did not come for a whole week, and Marius began to feel depressed. Every night he stood outside their house and gazed up at their lighted windows. Sometimes he saw a shadow pass in front of a lamp, and his heart beat faster.

	On the eighth night there was no light in the windows. Marius waited, his heart aching with pain, until finally going home. The next day they did not go to the Gardens, so again Marius went to the house as night was falling. Once again, there were no lights in the windows. He knocked on the door and spoke to the concierge.

	'Where's the old gentleman?' he asked.

	'He's left.'

	Marius felt the blood leave his face. Almost fainting, he asked in a weak voice, 'When did he leave?'

	'Yesterday.'

	'Where has he gone?'

	'I've no idea.'

	'Did he leave an address?'

	The concierge then recognized Marius from the previous week. He stared fiercely at him and said, 'So, it's you again! I was right. You are some kind of policeman.'

	With those words he slammed the door in Marius's face.



	Chapter seven

	The Jondrettes

	Summer and autumn passed, and winter came, but Marius saw no sign of M. Leblanc or 'Ursula'. He searched everywhere for them, but without success. He became like a homeless dog, wandering the streets in a mood of dark despair. Without 'Ursula', his life had become meaningless, work disgusted him, walking tired him, solitude bored him.

	'If only I hadn't followed them home,' he told himself. 'It gave me so much happiness just to look at her, and now, through my stupidity, I've lost even that.'

	Enjolras and his other friends tried to cheer him up by taking him to exciting places, but these expeditions always ended in the same way: Marius would leave the group and walk around the streets of Paris unhappily on his own.

	One cold but sunny afternoon in February, Marius was walking along the street when two young girls dressed in rags ran into him. One was tall and thin, the other smaller. From what they were shouting at each other, he understood that they were running from the police. He stood for a moment staring after them as they disappeared round a corner. Then he noticed a small parcel of papers lying on the ground.

	Realizing that one of the girls must have dropped it, he picked it up and called after them, but it was too late. The girls had already disappeared from sight. With a sigh, he put the package in his pocket and went on to dinner.

	That night at home, Marius opened the package and found that it contained four letters, all addressed to different people, and smelling strongly of cheap tobacco. Marius read the four letters and discovered that they were all asking for money. However, there was something strange about them: although they all seemed to be written by different people, they were written on the same rough paper in the same handwriting. He also noticed that each of them had similar spelling mistakes. Thinking no more about it, he wrapped the letters up again, threw them into a corner and went to bed.

	The next morning, while he was working, there was a gentle knock on his door.

	'Come in,' Marius said, expecting it to be the concierge, Mme Bougon. But the voice that answered, saying, 'I beg your pardon, Monsieur,' was not that of Mme Bougon. It was more like the voice of a sick old man.

	Marius looked up quickly and saw that his visitor was a thin girl wearing just a skirt and shirt. She looked cold and ill, and when she spoke, Marius saw that she had lost several of her teeth. There was, however, still a trace of beauty in the sixteen-year-old lace, like pale sunlight beneath the thick clouds of a winter's dawn. Marius rose to his feet, sure that he had seen the girl somewhere before.

	'What can I do for you, Mademoiselle?' he asked.

	'I've got a letter for you, M. Marius.'

	Marius opened the letter and read:

	My warm-hearted neighbour, I have heard of how you kindly paid my rent for me six months ago. I thank you for it. But my eldest daughter will tell you that my wife is sick and none of us have had any food for four days. Please, Monsieur, show us the kindness of your generous heart again. My daughter is at your service. Yours truly, Jondrette.

	Marius realized at once that the handwriting, the yellow paper and the smell of cheap tobacco was the same as in the four letters he had read the previous evening. He now had five letters, all the work of one author: the man who lived with his family in the next room.

	The Jondrette family had been Marius's neighbours for many months, but he had never before paid much attention to them. This was why he had failed to recognize the two daughters when they had run into him on the street. But now he understood that Jondrette's business was writing dishonest letters, asking for money from people he imagined were wealthier than himself.

	Marius looked up from the letter and watched the girl moving fearlessly around his room, studying the furniture and the mirror on the wall. Her eyes lit up when she noticed the books on his writing desk.

	'Books!' she said, and then added with pride, 'I know how to read and write. Look, I'll show you.'

	Picking up a pen that lay on the table, she wrote on a piece of paper, Be careful! The police are coming! She showed Marius her work and then, changing the subject quickly, for no reason at all, she gazed into his eyes and said shyly, 'Do you know, M. Marius, that you're a very handsome boy?'

	Approaching him, she rested a cold red hand on his shoulder and said, 'You never notice me, M. Marius, but I know you. I see you on the stairs, and I see you walking around the streets, looking so sad and alone.'

	Marius's cheeks went red. He moved away from the girl's touch and said, 'I think, Mademoiselle, that I have something belonging to you.' He handed her the parcel of letters.

	She clapped her hands and cried, 'We've been looking for that everywhere! How did you know they were mine? Of course, the handwriting. You were the man we ran into last night.'

	While she talked excitedly, she took out one of the letters. 'Ah, this is for the old man who goes to church every day. If I hurry, I might be able to catch him. Perhaps he'll give me enough for a dinner. We haven't eaten for three days... '

	Marius took a five-franc piece from his pocket and handed it to the girl.

	'The sun's come out at last!' she cried, eagerly accepting the coin. 'That's enough food for two days. You're a real gentleman, Monsieur.'

	With those words, she gave a little laugh and wave, grabbed some dry bread from the table and disappeared out of the door.

	***

	Marius had lived for five years without much money, but he had never been really poor. Now, after his conversation with the girl from the next room, he understood what real poverty was. Only a thin wall separated him from the family of lost souls in the room next door. He had heard them and seen them, but had paid them no attention, and he suddenly felt guilty.

	'If they had had another neighbour,' he thought, 'one who had noticed their suffering, perhaps they could have been rescued by now.'

	As Marius was thinking about the sad life of the family in the next room, he stared dreamily at the wall that separated them. Then, in the top corner near the ceiling, Marius saw that there was a triangular hole.

	'Let's see what these people are really like,' Marius thought. 'Then I'll be in a better position to help them.'

	He stood on a cupboard, put his eye to the hole, and looked through it into his neighbours' room.

	The Jondrettes' room was dirty and evil-smelling, unlike Marius's bare but clean room. Its only furniture was a chair, an old table, some cracked dishes and two dirty beds, one on each side of a fireplace. A man with a long, grey beard was sitting at the table, writing a letter and smoking a pipe. A large woman with greying hair, once red, was sitting by the fire, while a thin, pale-faced child sat on one of the beds.

	Marius, depressed at what he saw, was going to get down from the cupboard when the door of the Jondrettes' room opened and the elder girl came in. Slamming the door shut behind her she cried victoriously, 'He's coming!'

	'Who's coming?' Her father looked up.

	'The old man who goes to church. He's following me. I saw him with his daughter in the church, and gave him the letter. He said he would follow me here. I ran ahead to tell you he'll be here in two minutes.'

	'You're a good girl,' the man said, rising quickly to his feet. Then, turning to his wife, he said, 'Quickly! Put out the fire!' While she poured water on the flames, the man broke the chair with his foot and told his younger daughter to break a window. She put her fist through the glass and ran to her bed, crying because her arm was covered in blood.

	'Excellent,' her father smiled, tearing a piece off his shirt and using it as a bandage. 'Now we're ready for the kind gentleman. When he sees how miserable we are, he'll give us a lot of money, you'll see.'

	Moments later, there was a gentle knock on the door. Jondrette rushed to open it, bowing almost to the ground as he did so.

	'Please come in, my dear sir! Please enter, with your charming young lady.'

	An elderly man and a young girl appeared in the doorway and Marius, still looking through the hole in the wall, could not believe his eyes.

	It was She.

	She! Everyone who has ever loved will feel the force of that small word. In the bright mist that clouded his vision, Marius could hardly see the features of the sweet face that had lit his life for six months and had then disappeared, filling his life with darkness. And now the vision had reappeared!

	When Marius had recovered some of his senses, he saw that she seemed a little paler than before. Her companion as usual was M. Leblanc. As she entered the room, she put a large parcel on the table.

	'Monsieur, you will find some woollen stockings and blankets in the parcel,' M. Leblanc told Jondrette.

	'You are extremely generous, Monsieur,' Jondrette said, again bowing to the ground. 'But as you can see, we are unfortunate in many ways. We are without food, Monsieur, and without heating. No warmth for my unhappy children. Our only chair is broken. A broken window - in this weather! My wife ill in bed and our younger daughter injured.'

	'Oh, the poor child,' 'Ursula' said, seeing the girl's bleeding wrist.

	'She had an accident in the machine-shop where she works for six sous an hour, 'Jondrette explained. 'They may have to cut off her arm.'

	The daughter, taking her father's words seriously, began to scream with fear. While M. Leblanc and 'Ursula' tried to comfort her, Jondrette approached his wife and said in a whisper, 'Take a good look at that man.'

	He then returned to M. Leblanc and told him about his debts.

	'I owe sixty francs in rent,' he said.

	M. Leblanc took a coin out of his pocket and put it on the table.

	'Five francs is all I have with me,' he said. 'But I'll take my daughter home and come back this evening with more money for you.'

	Jondrette accompanied M. Leblanc and 'Ursula' out of the door and, after a few minutes' indecision, Marius jumped down from the cupboard and ran out into the street. But he was too late; their carriage had already gone. Miserably, he turned back to the house. He went into his room, pushing the door behind him, but the door would not shut. Turning, Marius saw that a hand was holding it open.

	'What is it?' he demanded.

	It was the Jondrette girl.

	'So it's you again,' he said almost fiercely. 'What do you want now?'

	She did not reply but stood thoughtfully looking at him, seeming to have lost all her earlier confidence. She had not entered the room, but was still standing in the half-light of the corridor.

	'What do you want?' Marius repeated angrily.

	'M. Marius,' she said at last, a faint light in her sad eyes, 'you seem upset. What's the matter?'

	'Nothing. Now please leave me alone.' Marius tried again to shut the door, but she still held it open.

	'You're making a mistake,' she said. 'You aren't rich, but you were generous this morning. You've been kind to us - now I want to be kind to you. Is there anything that I can do?'

	Marius considered her offer, then had an idea. Moving closer to her, he said, 'Do you know the address of those people who've just left your room?'

	'No.'

	'Can you find out for me?'

	'Is that what you want?' she said, a disappointed look on her face.

	'Yes.'

	The girl looked hard at him for a minute.

	'What will you give me?' she said at last.

	'Anything you want.'

	'Anything?'

	'Yes.'

	'Then I'll get it.'

	She left immediately, closing the door behind her.

	Marius sat down and buried his face in his hands, too overcome by emotion to think clearly. But then he heard a loud voice from the next room.

	'I tell you I'm sure.' Jondrette was speaking to his wife. 'I recognized him.'

	Without another thought, Marius jumped on to the cupboard and looked again through the hole in the wall.

	'Really?' His wife looked puzzled. 'Are you sure?'

	'Of course I'm sure. It's been eight years, but I recognized him at once.'

	He told the two girls to leave the room and then, when alone with his wife, he said, 'And I recognized the girl too. I'm surprised you didn't.'

	'Why should I? I've never seen her'

	But Jondrette bent down and whispered something in her ear. Straightening up, he said, 'Now do you recognize her?'

	'Her?' said the woman, her voice filled with sudden hatred. 'Are you sure? That's impossible!' she cried. 'Our daughters barefoot and without a dress between them, while she wears leather boots and a fur coat? You must be wrong. You've forgotten, that child was ugly, and this one's not bad-looking.'

	'I tell you, it's the same girl. You'll see. And I'll tell you another thing. She's going to make us a fortune. I'm tired of being poor. We deserve a better life, and this is our chance.'

	'What do you mean?'

	'He said he'll be here at six o'clock, with sixty francs. I'll bring some friends round, and we'll make sure he gives us a lot more money.'

	'What will you do if he doesn't give you more money?'

	Jondrette stroked his beard and laughed. 'We'll know what to do about it.' And then, as he was going to leave the room, he turned to his wife and said, 'You know, it's lucky he didn't recognize me. If he had, he wouldn't be coming back here again. It's the beard that saved me - my lovely, long, romantic beard!'

	With an ugly laugh, he pulled his cap down over his eyes and left the room.

	***

	Although Marius was a dreamer and not a man of action, he knew immediately that he had to save M. Leblanc and 'Ursula' from the trap that Jondrette was setting for them. But what could he do? He could not warn M. Leblanc because he did not know the old man's address. There was only one thing to do: he had to tell the police.

	Half an hour later, Marius was at the nearest police station.

	The desk clerk showed him into the police chief's office, where a tall man with a wide face and a thin, tight mouth was trying to keep warm next to a tire.

	'Are you the chief of police?' Marius asked.

	'He's away,' the tall man said. 'I'm Inspector Javert. Now, what do you want?'

	Marius told Javert about the morning's events. When he told Javert his address, he noticed the inspector's eyes light up with great interest. Then, when everything had been explained, Javert thought for a moment. Finally, he asked Marius for his door key and told him to go home and hide quietly in his room so that his neighbours would think he was out.

	'Take these with you,' the inspector went on, producing two small guns. 'When the old man and the girl arrive, let them start their business. When you think it's getting dangerous, shoot one of these guns. After that, I'll take charge.'

	Back in his room, Marius sat down nervously on his bed. It was nearly six o'clock. Outside it had stopped snowing, and a full moon was growing steadily brighter above the mist. Suddenly, he heard voices. Taking off his boots, he quietly climbed on to the cupboard and looked through the hole in the wall. A fire burned in the corner of the room, filling it with blood-red light. Jondrette, who had just come in, was shaking snow from his shoes.

	'Everything's arranged,' he said. 'Has the concierge gone out?'

	'Yes,' his wife said.

	'And you're sure he's not in next door?'

	'Positive.'

	'Good.' Then he turned to his daughters. 'Now, you two must go and keep guard in the street, one by the gate, one at the street corner.'

	'A fine job!' the elder girl called back. 'Keeping guard barefoot in the snow.'

	'Tomorrow you'll have fur boots!' her father called out after her.

	A few minutes later, there was nobody in the building except for Marius and the Jondrettes. Marius watched as Jondrette put a metal bar in the fire and inspected a rope ladder on the table. Next, he opened a drawer, took out a long knife and tested its blade with his finger. Suddenly, at exactly six o'clock, the door into the Jondrettes' room opened.

	'Welcome, Monsieur, 'Jondrette said, rising to his feet.

	M. Leblanc appeared and put four coins on the table. 'That is for your rent and food, Monsieur,' he said. 'Now we must discuss what else is needed.'

	Jondrette quietly told his wife to dismiss the carriage, and when she had left the room, turned back to his visitor.

	'How is the wounded child?' M. Leblanc asked him.

	'Not well.' Jondrette smiled sadly. 'She's in great pain. Her sister has taken her to hospital, but they'll be back soon.'

	The conversation continued politely in this way for several minutes. M. Leblanc asked Jondrette about his circumstances, and Jondrette smiled sadly as he invented lie after lie. Finally, Jondrette picked up a large picture that was leaning against the wall, and showed it to M. Leblanc.

	'What's that?' M. Leblanc said, looking at the badly-drawn picture of a soldier in uniform.

	'It's a work of art,' Jondrette informed him. 'I love this picture as much as I love my two daughters. But, unfortunately, I have to sell it. What do you think it's worth?'

	'It's just an old inn-sign. It's worth about three francs.'

	'I'll accept a thousand,' Jondrette softly replied.

	M. Leblanc rose and, standing with his back to the wall, looked quickly round the room. Jondrette was on his left, his wife was standing on his right near the door. Jondrette put the picture down and stepped quietly towards the old man.

	'You don't recognize me, do you?' he said in a loud, clear voice.

	At this signal, which he had pre-arranged with his friends, three men armed with metal poles rushed into the room. M. Leblanc grew pale, and gripped the back of the broken chair with his huge hands. Marius, meanwhile, raised his right hand with the gun, ready to fire the warning shot.

	'The carriage is ready?' Jondrette asked the three men.

	'Yes, with two good horses,' one of them replied.

	'Excellent.' He turned to M. Leblanc and repeated his earlier question. 'You still don't recognize me, do you?'

	'No.'

	'My name isn't Jondrette. It's Thenardier. Now do you recognize me?'

	M. Leblanc trembled slightly, but still shook his head. Marius, however, who had been going to fire the gun as a signal for the police to arrive, shook so much that he almost fell off the cupboard.

	'Thenardier,' he thought. 'That's the name of the man who saved my father's life at the Battle of Waterloo. The man I've promised to help!'

	If he fired the warning shot, M. Leblanc would be saved and Thenardier would be destroyed. But he would also have broken his promise to his father. He felt his knees grow weak. What should he do?

	Thenardier walked up and down in front of M. Leblanc.

	'Do you remember the little inn in Montfermeil eight years ago? You took away our Cosette, do you remember? Wearing that old yellow coat, pretending you were a tramp! Well, now you're going to learn that you can't make things right by just bringing a few hospital blankets! You're the cause of all my troubles. For 1500 francs you took away a girl who was bringing me lots of money.'

	'I don't know what you're talking about,' M. Leblanc said. 'I don't know who you are, but I know what you are. You're a dirty criminal.'

	'A criminal?' Thenardier said, suddenly angry. 'That's what you rich people call people like me, isn't it? Just because I've failed in business. I was a war hero, you know - I saved an officer's life at Waterloo! And you call me a criminal! Well, I'm going to teach you a lesson.'

	He began to move towards M. Leblanc, but the old man was too quick for him. With surprising speed, he pushed the table and chair to one side and ran to the window. He managed to open it but, before he could jump, the three men jumped on him and held him to the floor.

	This was too much for Marius.

	'Forgive me, father,' he murmured, preparing to fire the gun.

	But suddenly Thenardier cried, 'Don't hurt him!'

	After a long fight, M. Leblanc was tied up and taken to the bed.

	'No wallet?' Thenardier cried, having searched his pockets. 'Never mind.' He sat on the bed next to the helpless but brave old man, and said, 'Let's discuss things quietly. All I'm asking for is 200,000 francs. I realize that you don't have the money with you now, but I want you to write a letter. I'll tell you what to say.'

	He untied M. Leblanc's right hand and, producing a pen and paper, began:

	My dearest daughter, You must come at once. I need you urgently.

	The person who gives you this note will bring you to me. I shall be waiting.

	M. Leblanc signed his name Urbain Fabre, which seemed to satisfy Thenardier, and wrote an address on the envelope. Thenardier then took the letter and gave it to his wife.

	'There's a carriage outside. Don't be long.'

	Nearly half an hour passed. Thenardier seemed lost in his own dark thoughts. The prisoner did not move. Finally, there was the sound of horses in the street outside and, moments later, the door to the room was thrown open.

	'It's a false address,' Mme Thenardier cried. 'There's no Urbain Fabre. The old man's been lying to us!'

	Thenardier sat on the corner of the table in silence for some moments, swinging his leg and gazing with a fierce satisfaction at the fire. Then he turned to the prisoner and said in a slow, threatening voice, 'What did you hope to gain by giving me a false name and address?'

	'Time!' cried the prisoner in a loud voice, jumping from the bed, having secretly cut the ropes that tied him. Before the others in the room could react, M. Leblanc was standing by the fire, holding a metal bar above his head.

	'I'm not afraid of you,' he said. 'But neither should you fear me.'

	With those words he threw the metal bar out of the window into the street below.

	'Get him!' Thenardier shouted. 'He's defenceless.'

	Two men grabbed him by the shoulders.

	'Now cut his throat!' Thenardier called.

	Marius stared, frozen with fear as Thenardier, knife in hand, stood hesitating a few steps away from the prisoner. The brave man was in terrible danger, but Marius still could not fire the gun. Then, in the moonlight, he saw the solution to his problem. On top of the cupboard, by his feet, he noticed the piece of paper that the elder daughter had written on: Be careful! The police are coming!

	He immediately saw what he had to do. He took a piece of brick from the wall, wrapped the piece of paper around it and threw it through the hole into the middle of Thenardier's room.

	He was just in time. Thenardier was advancing towards his prisoner, knife in hand, when his wife cried, 'Something fell!'

	She picked up the piece of paper and handed it to her husband, who read it quickly.

	'It's Eponine's handwriting!' he cried a moment later. 'Quick! Get the ladder. The police are coming and we've got to go!'

	They threw the rope ladder from the open window but, before they could escape, the door opened and Inspector Javert walked in.

	'Relax,' he smiled. 'You can't escape through the window. There are five of you, and fifteen of us. You have no chance. Why not come quietly?'

	The men put down their weapons and surrendered without a fight. When everybody had been arrested and taken from the room, Javert noticed the prisoner, who was standing, head bowed, by the window. He turned to speak to another policeman but, when he looked back, he saw that the prisoner had gone. Javert rushed to the open window and looked down. The rope ladder was swinging gently above the empty street.

	'He must have been the cleverest of them all, 'Javert murmured angrily to himself.



	Chapter eight

	Marius and Cosette

	Not wishing to give evidence against Thenardier in court, Marius made immediate arrangements to leave his room. Early the following morning, he paid the concierge his final rent and went to live with his friend, Enjolras. Inspector Javert looked for Marius everywhere, but without success.

	Two months later, Marius was deeply unhappy. He sent money every Monday to Thenardier, who was in prison, which meant that he had even less money for himself. But the main reason for his unhappiness was that he was forced to live his life with no hope of seeing 'Ursula'.

	One afternoon he was sitting in a field, looking down at a small river, when his dreams of 'Ursula' were suddenly broken by the sound of a familiar voice. He looked up and recognized Eponine, Thenardiers elder daughter. Still wearing the same rags, with the same bold look in her eyes and the same rough voice, she had somehow become more beautiful. She stared at Marius with a look of pleasure on her pale face, and for some moments seemed unable to speak.

	'So at last I've found you,' she finally said. 'I've been looking for you everywhere. You aren't living in the same room any more?'

	'No,' said Marius.

	'Well, I can understand that. It's not nice, that sort of thing. But why are you wearing that dirty old hat? 'When Marius gave no answer, she went on, 'And you've got a hole in your shirt. I'll mend it for you. A young man like you ought to be nicely dressed.'

	Marius still said nothing, and after a moments pause she said, 'You don't seem very glad to see me, but I could make you look happy if I wanted to!'

	'How?' said Marius. 'What do you mean?'

	'You weren't so unfriendly last time.'

	'I'm sorry, but what do you mean?'

	She bit her lip and hesitated, as if trying to make up her mind about something. Finally, she said, 'I've got the address.'

	Marius's heart seemed to miss a beat. 'You mean

	'The address you wanted me to find out. The young lady, you know...' Her voice sank into a sigh.

	Marius jumped up and took her by the hand.

	'Let's go at once!' he cried, wild with excitement. Then he suddenly frowned and seized Eponine by the arm. 'But you must promise me,' he said, 'that you'll never tell your father the address.'

	'I promise,' the girl replied, staring at Marius with amusement.

	They had only gone a few steps when Eponine stopped and said, 'You remember you promised me something?'

	Marius felt in his pocket. All he had in the world was the five-franc piece he intended to give her father in prison. He pushed it into her hand, but she opened her fingers and let the coin fall to the ground. She looked at him with a mixture of disappointment and sadness in her eyes.

	'I don't want your money,' she said.

	***

	That evening, Cosette was alone in the house which Jean Valjean had bought about a year earlier. It was a small house in a back street, with a large, wild garden. Valjean had gone away on business for a couple of days, and Cosette was in the downstairs sitting room, playing the piano.

	Suddenly, she thought she heard the sound of footsteps in the garden. She listened at the window for a minute, then ran up to her bedroom, opened the window and looked out. The moonlit garden and the street beyond it were completely empty. Cosette, not a nervous girl by nature, smiled to herself and thought no more about it.

	The next evening, as she was walking in the garden, she was sure that she heard someone moving in the trees. Again, when she looked round, she saw nothing. When Jean Valjean returned from his business the following day, Cosette told him about the noises in the garden. He told her not to worry, but she noticed an anxious look in his eyes. He spent the next two nights walking around the garden, checking the gate, listening for noises, but nothing unusual happened.

	Then one morning, a few days later, Cosette noticed a large stone lying on the garden bench. Nervously, she picked it up and discovered an envelope underneath it. Inside, there was a small notebook filled with love poems. Cosette sat down and began to read, enjoying the music of the language and the beauty of the handwriting. She had never read anything like this before, and it affected her deeply.

	Her heart on fire, she took the notebook upstairs to her bedroom and read every word again. She remembered the handsome young man she had seen so often in the Luxembourg Gardens. As she read the notebook, she knew in her heart that he was the author of these beautiful, romantic words. Finally, she kissed the book, held it to her heart and waited for the evening, when she knew that something special was going to occur.

	That evening, Jean Valjean went out. Cosette spent a long time in front of the mirror, making her hair look beautiful and deciding which dress to wear. Finally, she went out into the garden. She sat on the bench where she had found the notebook and, moments later, had the strange feeling that she was being watched. She looked round and jumped to her feet.

	It was He!

	He looked paler and thinner than she remembered. His dark clothes were almost invisible in the shadows, and his face shone softly in the fading light. Cosette felt suddenly faint, but she did not move or make a sound.

	'Forgive me for being here.' Marius spoke at last. 'But I've been so unhappy. Do you recognize me? You mustn't be afraid. It's a long time ago, but do you remember the day when you first looked at me - in the Luxembourg Gardens? And the day you walked past me? Those things happened nearly a year ago. Forgive me for talking like this, I don't know what I'm saying - perhaps I'm annoying you? But the truth is, I can't live without you.'

	'Mother!' Cosette murmured, and began to fall.

	Marius caught her and held her tightly in his arms without realizing what he was doing, lost in a mist of love. Cosette, feeling her body close to his, took his hand and pressed it against her heart. Aware of the shape of the notebook under her dress, he said, 'So, you've read my notebook. Do you love me, too?'

	'Of course,' she answered in a low voice. 'You know I do.'

	Then, as if by magic, her lips were next to his and they were kissing. Afterwards, they sat together on the garden bench in a state of shock, neither of them speaking. Beneath the stars, they were happy just to look into each others eyes and hold each other's hands. Then, at last, they began to speak. They talked all evening about their dreams, their mistakes, their moments of happiness, their moments of despair. When everything had been said, she laid her head on his shoulder and asked, 'What's your name?'

	'My name's Marius. And yours?'

	'Cosette.'

	During that month of May in the year 1832, Cosette and Marius met every day in the wild garden of that small, secret house. They would sit and hold hands and talk, or just gaze into each other's eyes and smile.

	'How lovely you are,' Marius would sigh. 'There are moments when I think this is a dream. There are other moments when I think I'm a little mad. I love you so much.'

	To which Cosette would reply, 'I love you more with every minute that passes.'

	In this way, bathed in happiness, they lived untroubled by the world.

	***

	One beautiful, starry evening, Marius found Cosette sitting unhappily in her garden.

	'What's the matter?' he asked, sitting next to her on the bench.

	'My father said that we may have to leave,' she replied.

	Marius trembled. For six weeks, he had known nothing but uncomplicated happiness. Now, for the first time, there was a cloud in the clear blue sky of his life. He could not speak, and Cosette felt his hand grow cold.

	She asked, as he had done, 'What's the matter?'

	He replied, in a voice so low that she could hardly hear it, 'I don't understand what you mean.'

	'Father told me this morning that I have to pack everything and be ready to leave for England within a week.'

	Marius rose to his feet and said coldly, 'Cosette, are you going?'

	She looked up at him, her pale face lined with misery.

	'What else can I do?' she cried.

	'So you're leaving me.'

	'Oh, Marius, why are you being so cruel to me?'

	Marius turned his back to her and said, 'Then I shall have to go away.'

	'No, Marius, wait. I've got an idea.'

	Marius turned and was surprised to see her smiling.

	'What is it?'

	'If we go, you must come too. I'll tell you where, and you must meet me there, wherever it is.'

	'How can I possibly do that?' he cried. 'Are you crazy? You need money to go to England, and I haven't got any. I haven't told you, Cosette, but I'm a poor man. I wear a cheap hat, my jacket has lost half its buttons and there are holes in my boots.' He turned away from her and stood with his face pressed to the trunk of a tree, almost ready to faint. He stayed in that position for some time. Finally, he heard a small sound behind him and, turning round, he saw that Cosette was in tears.

	He fell on his knees in front of her and pressed her hand to his lips.

	'Don't cry,' he said. 'I cannot let you leave me. I promise you that if you leave me, I shall die. But listen to me - I have a plan. Don't expect me here tomorrow.'

	'Why not?' Cosette said, drying her tears. 'A whole day without seeing you! That's unbearable!'

	'It's worth losing a day together if we want to be happy for the rest of our lives.'

	'But what are you going to do?'

	'Wait until the day after tomorrow. I'll tell you then. But until then, I must give you my address. I'm living with a friend of mine, Enjolras.' Marius then took a knife out of his pocket and scratched his address on the wall - 16, rue de la Verrerie.'

	'Please, Marius,' Cosette said as she watched him. 'Where are you going tomorrow evening? I won't be able to sleep if you don't tell me.'

	'I'm going to try something.'

	'Well, I'll pray for you to succeed and I'll never stop thinking about you. I'll ask no more questions, but you must promise to be here early the day after tomorrow. Not later than nine o'clock.'

	'I promise,' Marius said.



	Chapter nine

	Monsieur Gillenormand

	M. Gillenormand, Marius's grandfather, was now ninety years old. He was unhappy about many things - about losing his teeth, about the political situation but, most of all, about the fact that he had not seen his grandson for four years, since their big quarrel. Although he was too proud to admit he was wrong, and although he was angry, M. Gillenormand hoped that Marius, whom he still loved, would return one day.

	One evening in June, M. Gillenormand was sitting in front of a large fire, staring into the flames and thinking bitterly of Marius. He was feeling depressed, because he realized that he would probably never see his grandson again. While he was gazing into the fire, thinking these sad thoughts, his old servant entered the room and asked, 'Will Monsieur receive M. Marius?'

	For a moment all the blood seemed to leave M. Gillenormand's face, and the servant began to worry that his master was ill. But the old man finally raised his head and said, in a low voice, 'Show him in.'

	Marius stood uncertainly in the doorway. The poor condition of his clothes could not be seen in the half-darkness of the room. Nothing of him was clearly visible except his face, which was calm and serious, but strangely sad.

	M. Gillenormand stared at his grandson with disbelief. At last! After four years! Was it really him? He wanted to open his arms and hug him, but all he said was, 'What have you come for?'

	Marius murmured something in embarrassment.

	'I can't hear you,' the old man said, looking annoyed. 'Have you come to apologize? Do you now see that you were wrong?'

	'No, Monsieur.' Marius lowered his eyes.

	'Well then,' the old man shouted, 'what do you want?'

	'Monsieur, I ask you to have pity on me. I know I'm not welcome here, but I have come to ask for only one thing. Then I'll go away at once.'

	'You're a young fool,' the old man said. 'Who said you had to go away? You left me - your grandfather! - to join in those street protests against the government, I suppose. You're probably in trouble with the police, or you're in debt, and you've run back to me for help

	'Monsieur, it's none of those things.'

	'Well, what is it exactly that you want?'

	'I have come to ask your permission to get married.'

	The old man paused for a moment before saying, 'So, you want to get married at the age of twenty-one. I suppose you've got some sort of career, now? Perhaps you've made a fortune. What do you earn as a lawyer?'

	'Nothing.'

	'Well then, I imagine the lucky girl must have money.'

	'She's no richer than I am.'

	'What does her father do?'

	'I don't know.'

	M. Gillenormand turned away with disgust.

	'So that's it. Twenty-one years old, no job, no money. Your wife will have to count the sous when she goes to the market, won't she?'

	'I beg you, Monsieur,' Marius cried. 'I love her so much. Please allow me to marry her!'

	The old man gave a high, unpleasant laugh.

	'So you said to yourself, "I'll have to go and see him, that old fool. He'll be so happy to see me that he won't care who I marry. I haven't a pair of shoes, and she hasn't a shirt, but never mind. I'm going to throw away my youth, my career, my whole life, and dive into poverty with a woman around my neck... " That's what you think, isn't it? Well, my boy, you can do whatever you want. But I will never give you my permission! Never!'

	'Grandfather

	'Never!'

	The tone of his grandfather's voice robbed Marius of all hope. He rose and crossed the room slowly, with his head bowed. He had just reached the door, however, when M. Gillenormand moved quickly towards him, pulled him back into the room and pushed him into an armchair.

	'Tell me about it,' he said to Marius, who stared back with silent amazement, unaware that the word 'grandfather' was responsible for the change in the old man's behaviour. 'Come on, tell me about your love affairs. Don't be afraid to talk. Don't forget, I'm your grandfather. Here... ' he said, taking a purse from a drawer and putting it on the table. 'Here's some money for you. Buy yourself some new clothes.'

	Marius told his grandfather all about Cosette and how much he loved her. M. Gillenormand listened carefully and, when Marius had finished, he laughed.

	'You must enjoy yourself when you're young,' he said. 'But you must also be sensible. Don't get married yet, that's my advice. Have fun with the girl, but don't marry her. Make her your lover but not your wife.'

	Marius, too shocked to reply, shook his head and rose to his feet. He then turned slowly to the old man, bowed deeply and said, 'Four years ago you insulted my father. Today you have insulted my future wife. I shall ask no more favours of you, Monsieur. Goodbye.'

	M. Gillenormand called for Marius to come back, but it was too late. The proud young man had closed the door and gone.

	'Oh my God,' the old man cried, burying his face in his hands. 'What have I done? This time he'll never come back.'

	***

	Marius left his grandfathers house in a state of despair, and returning to his room, fell asleep fully-dressed on the bed. When he woke up, Enjolras was in the room with a few other friends. They all looked very nervous and excited about something.

	'What's the matter?' Marius asked sleepily

	'Are you coming to the funeral of General Lamarque?'

	'Who's he?'

	Enjolras and his friends shook their heads with amazement at their friend's lack of awareness, and soon left the room. Marius opened a drawer and took out the two guns which Inspector Javert had lent him in February. Putting them in his jacket pocket, he went out and continued to wander aimlessly around the streets, noticing only occasionally the strange atmosphere of excitement that was growing in the town. People were running around, and there was a lot of noise, but Marius paid little attention. He could think of only one thing: his meeting later that evening with Cosette. This would be his last brief happiness; after that, there would be only darkness.

	At nine o'clock that evening, Marius crept into the garden of Cosette's house, but she was not there waiting for him as she had promised. Looking up, he saw that there were no lights on in the house and that all the windows were closed. Unable to control himself, he beat his fists against the walls of the house.

	'Cosette!' he cried, not caring who heard him. 'Where are you?'

	He called her name again and again until, exhausted, he sat down on the stone steps. Now she was gone, he told himself, he had no future. There was nothing for him to do except die.

	Suddenly he heard a voice calling through the trees from the street.

	'M. Marius!'

	He looked up.

	'Who's that?'

	'Is that you, M. Marius?'

	'Yes.'

	'Your friends are waiting for you at the barricade in the rue de Chanvrerie.'

	Marius ran to the gate and was just in time to see the figure of Eponine, Thenardier's daughter, disappearing into the shadows at the end of the street.



	Chapter ten

	The Barricade

	In the spring of 1832, the people of Paris were ready for revolution. Charles X, who had become king in 1824, believed that he had total power over the French people. He was a strong supporter of the Catholic church and the aristocracy, and he took away the freedoms that Napoleon had given the ordinary citizens. Although this made him very unpopular, he thought that his opponents would be too weak to prevent him from doing what he wanted. He was wrong. In 1830, there was a peaceful revolution, and he was forced to leave. The new king, Louis-Philippe, was a brave and clever man who loved his country. The ordinary people liked him at first, but he soon showed that he was more interested in power for his family than democracy for his people. He understood business, but he could not understand the problems of poor people. Neither could he understand the concept of freedom of speech, and he often sent soldiers into the streets to attack people who were making public protests.

	As the summer approached, the mood of the workers and the poor became angrier and angrier. Their anger exploded into violence in June 1832, when General Lamarque died. The General had been very popular with the people of France because of his love for Napoleon. The day of his funeral was arranged for 5 June, and thousands of people saw this as a chance to make a public protest against the king and his government.

	At first, the funeral went quietly. Soldiers accompanied the coffin as it was carried slowly across Paris. A large crowd followed behind, waving flags and carrying swords and heavy sticks. The crowd grew more and more excited, until finally they tried to take the coffin away from the soldiers and carry it across a bridge. Their exit was blocked by more soldiers on horseback. For a moment, nothing happened. Then there were two gunshots. The first shot killed the commander of the soldiers guarding the exit to the bridge. The second killed a deaf old woman who was trying to shut her window.

	Then the fighting started.

	Soldiers attacked the crowd with swords; the crowd threw stones and ran screaming across the bridge. Minutes later, the sounds of war echoed across the whole city of Paris.

	***

	As soon as the fighting started, Enjolras and several of his friends started to build a barricade outside the Corinth wine shop in the rue de la Chanvrerie, a small street surrounded by dark alleys in the market district of Paris. Enjolras had been joined by many strangers as he and his friends had run shouting along the street. There was a tall, grey-haired man whom nobody knew, but whose strong, brave face had impressed everybody. There were several street children, excited by the sound of battle, who also joined them. One of these children was Eponine, who had dressed like a boy so that no one would tell her to go home. Having run to tell Marius that his friends were waiting for him, she was helping Enjolras and his companions to build the barricade. New people arrived all the time, bringing with them gunpowder and weapons to fight the soldiers who would be arriving very soon.

	Enjolras, who was the leader of the rebels, organized the building of a second barricade and the manufacture of bullets from melted silver. The tall, grey-haired man was doing useful work on the larger barricade, and Eponine (whom everyone thought was a boy) worked hard too. The barricades were finished in less than an hour and, with the sound of drums in the city growing louder, Enjolras brought a table out into the street and sat down with his friends for a drink.

	Night fell, but nothing happened. While the fifty men behind the barricade waited impatiently for the arrival of sixty thousand soldiers, Enjolras approached the tall, grey-haired man.

	'Who are you?' he asked.

	When the man said nothing, Enjolras became suspicious.

	'You're a policeman, aren't you?' he said.

	The man smiled and eventually admitted that he was.

	'My name's Javert,' he said.

	Before he could move, Enjolras ordered four men to search him. When they found a letter in his pocket which proved that he had been sent to spy on them, they tied him to a post inside the inn,

	'You'll be shot two minutes before the barricade falls,' Enjolras informed him.

	***

	Marius left the garden and, mad with grief at losing Cosette, walked towards the sound of drums and gunfire in the centre of the city. He had only one thought in his mind: he wanted to die.

	Marius pushed his way through the crowds of frightened, murmuring people that filled the streets until he reached the market area. Here, he found the unlit streets suddenly filled with soldiers. Unafraid, Marius ran through the shadows, ignoring shouts for him to stop. Someone fired a gun and a bullet hit a wall just behind him, but he didn't care.

	He was just approaching the rue de Chanvrerie when he heard a loud voice calling from the shadows: 'Who's there?'

	'The French Revolution!' he heard a distant voice reply - the voice of his friend, Enjolras.

	Marius stood behind an alley wall, hidden in the shadows. Around the corner, he could see a row of soldiers aiming their guns down the rue de Chanvrerie, waiting for the order to fire.

	'Fire!' the order finally came. The street was lit with a sudden flash of light and filled with the thunder of gunfire.

	Then the soldiers attacked.

	Marius stood up and ran along a series of alleys that led into the rue de la Chanvrerie, behind the Corinth wine shop. When he reached the stronghold, soldiers were already climbing the barricade, shooting at the rebels. Marius saw a soldier attacking Enjolras, who had fallen backwards and was calling for help. Marius took Javert's guns from his pockets and shot the soldier dead.

	Soldiers now occupied the top of the barricade, but were unable to advance any further because the defenders fought so fiercely. Marius, who had thrown away his guns and was now without a weapon, began to move towards a barrel of gunpowder he had seen near the door of the wine shop. He did not notice a soldier aiming his gun at him. Neither did he see, at the moment the soldier fired, a young boy dressed in rags jump in front of the gun and fall wounded as the bullet meant for Marius hit him in the hand.

	'Put down your weapons and surrender!' a soldier called from the top of the barricade.

	'Fire!' Enjolras shouted.

	The soldiers and the rebels fired at each other at the same time, filling the air with thick clouds of dark smoke. When the smoke cleared, there were many dead bodies on both sides. The survivors were reloading their guns in silence, when suddenly a loud voice called, 'Get out now, or I'll blow up the barricade!'

	All heads turned to stare in the direction of the voice. Marius was standing at the foot of the barricade, holding a flaming torch above a barrel of gunpowder.

	'If you blow up the barricade,' a sergeant called, 'you'll blow up yourself as well!'

	Marius smiled and lowered the torch towards the gunpowder. Within seconds, the soldiers had left the barricade, leaving their dead and wounded behind, and were running into the darkness at the far end of the street.

	Enjolras threw his arms around Marius's neck.

	'So you've come!' he cried.

	Marius hugged Enjolras and many other friends he recognized.

	While the soldiers waited at the far end of the street for further orders, and the rebels removed dead bodies from the barricade and took care of the wounded, Marius walked around the stronghold in a kind of dream. After two months of happiness with Cosette, he was now in the middle of a war. He could not believe this was happening to him. He was so confused that he did not recognize Javert, tied to a post inside the inn throughout the battle.

	As he was walking by the smaller barricade, his thoughts were interrupted by a weak voice calling his name from the shadows.

	'M. Marius!'

	He looked about him but, seeing no one, he started to walk away, thinking that he was imagining things.

	'M. Marius!' He heard the voice again.

	Marius gazed into the shadows, but could still see nothing.

	'I'm at your feet,' the voice said.

	Looking down, Marius saw a dark shape crawling along the ground towards him. By the light of a lamp on the pavement, he could see a torn jacket, trousers with holes in them, and two bare feet. A white face was turned towards him and the voice asked, 'Do you recognize me? It's Eponine.'

	Marius bent down quickly, and saw that it was indeed that unhappy girl, dressed in a man's clothes.

	'What are you doing here?' he said. Then, noticing the pool of blood on the ground behind her, cried, 'You're wounded! I'll carry you to the inn. They'll take care of you there. Is it very bad?'

	She showed him the bullet hole in her hand.

	'A soldier was going to shoot you,' she said, her voice no more than a whisper. 'But I put my hand in front of his gun.'

	'You poor child,' Marius said. 'We'll put a bandage on that wound immediately. You'll be all right.'

	'The bullet passed through my hand,' Eponine murmured, 'but it came out through my back. It's no use trying to move me, but I'll tell you how you can treat my wound better than any doctor. Sit down on that stone, close beside me.'

	Marius sat next to her. She rested her head on his knee and said without looking at him, 'Oh, what happiness. Now I don't feel any pain,'

	For a moment she was silent. She pressed her hand to her chest, from which blood was pouring like dark wine. Then, with a great effort, she raised herself on one arm and, struggling for breath, looked into Marius's eyes.

	'I can't cheat you,' she said at last. 'I have a letter for you in my pocket. I've had it since yesterday. I was asked to post it, but I didn't. I didn't want you to get it. But now we're both going to die, it doesn't matter, does it? I can't be jealous any more. Take your letter.'

	She took hold of Marius's hand with her wounded hand and, without seeming to feel the pain, guided it to her pocket, from which he took the letter.

	'Now you must promise me something for my trouble,' she said. 'You must kiss me on the forehead after I'm dead... I shall know.'

	She let her head fall back on his knees. Her eyelids trembled, and then she was still. Just as Marius thought that her sad soul had finally left her body, she slowly opened her eyes, and said in a voice so sweet that it seemed already to come from another world, 'You know, M. Marius, I think I was a little bit in love with you.'

	With those words, she closed her eyes for the last time and died.

	Marius kissed her pale forehead and laid her gently on the ground. Then he returned to the wine shop, and opened the letter that she had given him. By candlelight he read,

	My dearest, We are leaving this house at once. We go tonight to Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme, and in a week we shall be in England. Cosette, 4 June.

	Marius covered Cosette's letter with kisses. So she still loved him! He thought for a moment that now he must not die, but then he thought, 'She's going away.'

	She was going with her father to England, and his grandfather had refused to give his permission for him to marry. Nothing had changed, and he decided that he had one last duty to perform: he must send Cosette a final message and tell her of his death. He tore a page out of the pocket notebook he always carried and wrote:

	Our marriage was impossible. I went to my grandfather, and he refused to give his permission. I have no money, and neither have you. I hurried to see you, but you had gone. You remember the promise I made you. I shall keep it. I shall die. I love you. When you read this, my soul will be very near and smiling at you.

	He folded the letter, wrote Cosette's new address on the back and called over a young boy.

	'What's your name?' he asked the boy.

	'Gavroche.'

	'Well, Gavroche, will you do something for me? I want you to deliver this letter to the address written on the outside.'

	The boy scratched his head, thought for a moment, and then, with a sudden movement, took the letter and ran off into the night.



	Chapter eleven

	The Letter

	Jean Valjean, at that moment, was in a state of terrible shock. For the first time in their life together, he and Cosette had quarrelled. She had not wanted to leave the house, but she had eventually obeyed him. They had left quickly, at nightfall, bringing their servant, Toussaint, with them, but very little luggage. Cosette had brought her letter case and blotter with her, Valjean his box of child's clothing and the old National Guard uniform which all respectable men possessed, and which he had worn under a previous identity.

	In their new house, they went to bed in silence. Cosette, however, did not leave her bedroom the next day, and Jean Valjean had dinner alone. As he was eating, Toussaint told him about the fighting in the city, but he did not pay much attention. He was too worried about Cosette. There was no reason, he thought, why they should not continue to live happily together in England. As long as he had Cosette, he would be happy, and it did not matter where they lived. He began to feel happier as he thought about the journey they would soon be making. He stood up and was going to leave the room when something made him stop. He glanced again at the mirror. Cosette's blotter was lying on a cupboard just below it and, as Valjean stared at its reflection, he read the following lines:

	My dearest, We are leaving this house at once. We go tonight to Number 7, rue de 1'Homme-Arme, and in a week we shall be in England. Cosette, 4June.

	In her unhappy state of mind, Cosette had forgotten to remove the page that she had used to blot the letter she had written to Marius. She had left it on the cupboard and the mirror, reflecting the backwards handwriting, made the message clearly visible.

	Valjean moved closer to the mirror and read the lines again, not wanting to believe them. But there was no doubt that this was Cosette's handwriting. He began to shake and he fell back into an armchair, feeling angry and betrayed. He had suffered terribly over the years and, until now, he had survived every disaster. But this was the worst thing that had ever happened to him - someone was threatening to rob him of the only person he loved!

	He murmured to himself, 'She's going to leave me,' and the pain of those words cut into his heart like a knife.

	After a short time, he rose to his feet and looked again at the blotter. His anger and misery of minutes before had been replaced by a terrible calmness. He stared at the blotter, coldness in his eyes, the darkness of the deepest night in his heart. He remembered clearly the young man in the Luxembourg Gardens who had shown such great interest in Cosette, and he was certain that this was the man she had written to.

	He went out into the night and sat on the doorstep, his heart filled with a terrible hatred for the man who was trying to steal Cosette from him. He sat for a long time listening to the sound of distant gunfire in the city, wondering how to get his revenge, when suddenly he heard footsteps. Looking up, he saw a pale-faced boy, dressed in rags, studying the numbers of the houses in the street.

	Seeing Valjean on his doorstep, the boy stopped and asked, 'Do you live in this street?'

	'Yes. Why?'

	'I'm looking for Number Seven. I have a letter for a girl who lives here.'

	'Well, I'm the girl's father. You can give the letter to me. Oh, and one more thing before you go,'Valjean said when the boy had handed him the letter. 'Where should I take the reply?'

	'That letter comes from the barricade in the rue de la Chanvrerie,' the boy replied. 'Which is where I'm going now. Goodnight citizen.'

	Jean Valjean went back into the house and tried to make sense of the words that danced before his eyes: I shall die... When you read this, my soul will be very near...

	This was enough to fill his hate-filled heart with sudden joy. So, the problem was solved! The man who threatened his happiness was going to die - was perhaps already dead.

	Then Valjean frowned and, after a quick calculation, decided that Marius was probably still alive. But it made no difference. He was still certain to die, and Valjean's happiness would be safe. If he kept the letter in his pocket, Cosette would never know what had happened to the other man, and life with her would continue the same as before. What happiness!

	But his happiness had no sooner returned than it disappeared again in a cloud of despair. In his heart he knew he had no choice. For the sake of Cosette's happiness, he would have to try and save the life of the man she loved - the man he hated more than any other in the world.

	Half an hour later he left the house, dressed in his National Guard uniform, with a loaded gun and a pocket full of gunpowder, and made his way towards the market district of Paris.



	Chapter twelve

	Fight to the Death

	During the night, the thirty-seven remaining rebels strengthened the main barricade and made more bullets. The ground floor of the wine shop became a hospital for the wounded, and the bodies of the dead were taken to an alley near the smaller of the two barricades. Four of the dead people were National Guards, and their uniforms were removed.

	After a long discussion with his friends, Enjolras decided that the married men (there were five of them) had to leave.

	'It's your duty not to die,' he told them. 'You must return to your families.'

	'How can we leave?' they protested. 'We're surrounded. The soldiers will shoot us as soon as they see us.'

	'You can wear these.' Enjolras pointed to the National Guard uniforms that had been taken off the dead soldiers.

	'But there are only four,' Marius observed.

	'Then one of us must stay and fight,' one of the married men replied.

	A long argument followed, during which each of the married men tried to persuade the others to go. Finally, someone shouted to Marius, 'You decide which one must stay.'

	Marius went pale at the thought of having to choose which man had to die. He stared down at the four uniforms but, as he did so, a fifth uniform fell as if by magic at his feet.

	Looking round, Marius recognized Cosette's father. Jean Valjean, who had arrived unnoticed at the barricade, had been listening to the argument and had quickly understood the situation.

	'Now you can all leave,' he said.

	The sky grew lighter, but not a door or window was open in the street. The barricade was stronger than it had been for the first assault, and the rebels were at their positions, guns loaded and ready for action. They did not have long to wait.

	Sounds of chains and of heavy wheels moving along the stone streets could be heard, and then soldiers came into view at the end of the street, pulling a large cannon. The rebels fired their guns but, when the smoke had cleared, they saw the soldiers, unharmed, steadily aiming the cannon at the barricade. Moments later, an officer shouted a command and the cannon roared into action. The cannonball crashed into the bottom of the barricade with a loud explosion, but did little damage. The rebels clapped and cheered.

	More soldiers moved into position at the end of the street, behind the cannon, and started to build a low wall with pieces of broken stone. At the same time, the leader of the gun crew adjusted the aim of the cannon.

	'Heads down!' Enjolras shouted.

	The next cannonball exploded against the wall at one end of the barricade, killing two men and wounding three.

	'We mustn't let that happen again,' Enjolras said. He aimed his gun over the barricade at the leader of the gun crew, and fired. The gunner - a fair-haired, handsome young man - spun round twice with his head thrown back, and fell sideways across the cannon. Blood poured from the middle of his back.

	A tear rolled down Enjolras's cheek.

	'It's sad,' he murmured to Marius, who was standing next to him. 'He looked a brave young man.'

	***

	The battle continued for some time; the cannon destroyed the upper windows of the wine shop, and did some damage to the barricade, but the rebels did not withdraw. They fired back at the soldiers, killing many men. In the pauses between shooting, the rebels could hear the sound of fighting in other parts of Paris. They were filled with hope that help would come soon, but the hope did not last long. Within half an hour the sound of gunfire in other places had stopped, and the rebels knew that they were alone. When a second cannon was moved into position next to the first, they knew that the end was near.

	Both cannons fired together, accompanied by gunfire from soldiers at the end of the street and on the rooftops. As other guns began firing at the smaller barricade, the rebels fought back bravely, but they were running out of bullets. There were only twenty-six men left, and the main attack on the barricade was going to take place very soon. Some men, including Marius, stayed on the main barricade, while the others built a low stone wall around the door of the wine shop. Enjolras, inside the wine shop, turned to Javert, who was still tied to the post.

	'I haven't forgotten you,' he said, putting a loaded gun on the table. 'The last man to leave this place will blow your brains out.'

	At this point, Jean Valjean spoke to Enjolras.

	'You're the leader, aren't you? Can I ask you for a favour?'

	'You saved a man's life by giving him your uniform. You deserve some reward. What do you want?'

	'Let me kill this man.'

	'That's fair,' Enjolras decided, when nobody objected. 'You can have your spy.'

	At the same moment there was the sound of a drum, followed by a loud roar.

	'They're coming!' cried Marius from the top of the barricade.

	The rebels rushed to their positions, leaving Valjean alone with Javert inside the wine shop. Valjean untied the rope around Javert's feet and, taking him by the belt of his coat, led him outside. Only Marius, looking over his shoulder, saw them cross the stronghold towards the smaller barricade. Valjean, his gun in one hand, pulled Javert behind him over the barricade and into a narrow alley, where the corner of a house hid them from view. A terrible heap of dead bodies lay not far away, among them the blood-stained body of a young girl in man's clothes - Eponine.

	Javert glanced at the dead body and murmured, 'I think I know that girl. 'Then, returning his attention to Valjean, he said calmly, 'I think you know me, too. Take your revenge.'

	Valjean, however, took a knife from his pocket and cut the ropes that tied Javert's wrists.

	'You're free to go,' he said.

	When Javert stared at him, speechless with surprise, Valjean went on, I don't suppose I'll leave here alive. But if I do, I'm staying at Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme. Now go.'

	Javert buttoned his coat, straightened his shoulders and, with a puzzled look on his face, began to walk off in the direction of the market. He had only gone a few steps, however, when he turned and looked at Valjean. 'I find this embarrassing,' he said. 'I'd rather you killed me.'

	'Go away,' Valjean replied.

	Javert walked away slowly and Valjean, waiting for him to turn a corner, fired his gun into the air and returned to the stronghold.

	'It's done,' he said.

	***

	There was a roar of gunfire and the soldiers attacked, rushing towards the barricade. Many fell, but many more reached the barricade. The first assault was beaten back by the brave rebels, but the soldiers attacked again and again. Soon, the ground below the barricade was piled with dead and wounded men as the rebels and soldiers fought hand to hand. The rebels fought long and hard to defend the stronghold, but finally they had to withdraw to the low wall outside the wine shop. They stood with their backs to the door, shooting up at the soldiers who were climbing down towards them from the barricade. One by one the remaining rebels escaped into the wine shop, until only Enjolras and Marius were left outside. As the two friends moved back towards the door, fighting off the soldiers, a bullet hit Marius in the shoulder. His eyes closed and, in great pain, he felt a hand grab him as he fell.

	'They've taken me prisoner,' he thought, moments before losing consciousness. 'Now I shall be shot.'

	The soldiers, meanwhile, attacked the wine shop. Before long, they broke down the door and rushed inside. Enjolras and the few surviving rebels fought bravely, but the soldiers were too strong. Soon, all the rebels were dead, including Enjolras, who was the last to die. Sword in hand, surrounded by soldiers, he refused to surrender. He died in a rain of bullets with a strangely victorious smile on his lips.



	Chapter thirteen

	The Sewers of Paris

	Marius had indeed been taken prisoner, but not by the soldiers. It was Jean Valjean's hand that had caught him as he fell. Valjean had taken no part in the battle. He had been looking after wounded men while bullets flew all around him. When Marius had been hit, Valjean ran to him at once, grabbed him before he fell and carried his unconscious body into a small alley behind the wine shop. Valjean lowered Marius to the ground, stood with his back to the wall and looked around him.

	The situation was terrible. There seemed to be no escape. On one side of him was the field of battle. On the other side was the low barricade, behind which hundreds of soldiers waited for rebels trying to escape. Both ways meant certain death. It was a situation that only a bird could have escaped from. Valjean looked desperately around him, at the house opposite, the barricade, the ground. And then he had a sudden idea!

	At the foot of the smaller barricade, half-hidden by broken stones and pieces of wood, there was a hole in the road covered with an iron grille. Valjean leapt forward and, using all his strength, he moved the stones and wood, opened the grille, lifted Marius on to his shoulders and climbed down into the darkness.

	A few minutes later, he found himself in a long underground passage, a place of absolute peace and silence. He was inside the Paris sewers. He could just see, by the grey light from the grille above his head, that he was surrounded by walls. Ahead of him lay total darkness, but he had to go on. The soldiers might discover the grille by the barricade at any moment, and come down in search of him.

	With Marius lying across his shoulders, Valjean walked forward into the darkness, feeling his way along the wet, slippery walls with his hands. He moved from one passage into another, slipping several times on the wet floor. He could not see where he was going, but he knew he had to follow the downward slope of the passages towards the river.

	He walked blindly downwards in this way for a long time, his clothes wet with the blood from Marius's wound, the faint whisper of the young man's breath in his ear. He walked in total darkness, the silence broken occasionally by the thunder of gun carriages and horses racing along the streets of Paris far above his head.

	Suddenly, he saw his own shadow on the floor of the passage in front of him. Looking back, he saw the distant light of a torch. He was being followed! He pressed himself against the wall, held his breath and waited. In the distance, a group of men formed a circle around the torchlight. They seemed to be listening for something, waiting for someone to move. Finally, the group of men moved off along another passage, and Valjean was left in total darkness once again.

	He continued his journey through the sewers. Sometimes the roof of the passages was so low that he had to bend down as he walked. His feet slipped all the time in the water on the ground, and he felt sick and faint with the terrible, airless smell. At last, exhausted, he stopped beneath a large grille that brought him much-needed light and fresh air. He laid Marius down gently at the edge of the sewer, and looked down at his face. It was covered with blood and as pale as death. Valjean tore pieces oft his own shirt and bandaged Marius's wounded shoulder as well as he could. Then, bending over the unconscious body, Valjean stared at Marius with hatred in his eyes.

	He found two objects in Marius's clothing: a piece of bread and a wallet. Valjean ate the bread and, opening the wallet, found a note which Marius had written:

	My name is Marius Pontmercy. My body must be taken to the house of my grandfather, M. Gillenormand, 6 rue des Filles-du- Calvaire, in the Marais.

	Valjean repeated the address until he could remember it, returned the wallet to Marius's pocket, picked Marius up again and continued his journey downwards towards the river. He did not know what part of the city he was passing under or how far he had come. The only thing he was sure of was that the light through the grilles far above his head was growing weaker, which meant that the sun was setting. At one point he had to walk waist-deep through water, and almost sank as the ground turned to sand beneath his feet. Finally, when even his great strength was beginning to fade, he saw ahead of him a light - the clear light of day. He was suddenly filled with new energy at the sight, at last, of his way of escape from the sewers. Forgetting the weight of Marius on his shoulders and his own hunger and tiredness, he ran towards the light. He had to bend as the roof of the tunnel became lower, but when he reached the light, Valjean stopped and gave a cry of despair. The opening was closed with a strong iron gate, held firm by a huge, rusty lock. Through the bars, Valjean could see daylight, the river, a narrow riverbank - but how could he get out?

	Valjean laid Marius down by the wall, where the floor was dry. Then, moving to the gate, he shook it fiercely with both hands, trying to bend the bars with the last of his strength. But the gate was solid and the bars were firm.

	Valjean turned his back to the gate and sank to the ground, his head bowed between his knees. There was no way out and, as all hope of escape left him, he began to think of Cosette.

	***

	While in this state of despair, Valjean felt a hand on his shoulder. He thought he was dreaming. He looked up and saw a man dressed in old clothes standing beside him. Despite the unexpectedness of this meeting, Valjean recognized the man at once. It was Thenardier. Valjean did not show that he recognized the man, and saw with relief that Thenardier had not recognized him.

	'I'll make a bargain with you,' the man said.

	'What do you mean?'

	Thenardier nodded in Marius's direction.

	'You've killed a man. Give me half of what you found in this man's pockets, and I'll unlock the gate for you.' He produced a large key from his pocket, and a piece of rope. 'I'll give you this as well,' he said. 'Then you can tie stones to the body and throw it in the river.'

	Valjean took the rope without speaking.

	'What about my share of the money?'Thenardier asked.

	Valjean took thirty francs from his pockets and showed it to Thenardier, who stared with disbelief. 'You killed a man for just thirty francs? You're a fool.' He searched Marius's pockets himself, and then Valjean's.

	'It's true,' he said at last. 'That's all there is. Oh well. Never say that I'm not a kind man.'

	He took the thirty francs and, helping Valjean to lift Marius on to his shoulders, he put the key in the lock and opened the gate just wide enough for Valjean to pass through. When Valjean was outside, Thenardier closed the gate behind him and disappeared, like a rat, into the darkness of the sewers.

	***

	Valjean laid Marius gently on the grass and stood up, surrounded by silence, enjoying the feeling of fresh air on his face. Then, just as he was bending to splash water from the river on Marius's face, he was aware of someone else standing behind him. He looked round quickly and saw a tall man in a long coat, a large stick in his hand. Although the man's face was hidden in shadow, Valjean recognized him as Inspector Javert.

	Javert, however, did not recognize Valjean at first. He had been more interested in catching Thenardier, who had escaped from prison and was known to be in the area.

	'Who are you?' he asked.

	Valjean told him his name and stood, without moving, as Javert approached and stared into his eyes.

	'Inspector Javert,' Valjean said quietly. 'I beg you to do me one favour. I promise not to try and escape. I gave you my address this morning, if you remember, so you would know where to find me anyway.'

	Javert did not seem to hear. He stared into Valjean's eyes for a long time, then, stepping back with a look of confusion in his eyes, asked dreamily, 'What are you doing here? Who is this man?'

	'Will you help me to take him home?' Valjean said. 'He's badly injured.'

	Javert looked unhappy, but he did not refuse. Bending down, he took a handkerchief from his pocket, wet it in the river and bathed Marius's blood-stained forehead. Then he felt Marius's wrist.

	'He's dead,' he said.

	'No, not yet,' Valjean replied, feeling in Marius's jacket for the wallet. 'Look,' he said, showing Javert the note with Marius's grandfather's address. 'That's where we need to take him.'

	Javert shouted to the driver who was waiting for him to bring his carriage close to the river. With Marius in the back seat, Valjean and Javert side by side in the front, the carriage drove off quickly through the dark and strangely empty streets of Paris.

	When they arrived at M. Gillenormand's house, a servant answered the door.

	'Does M. Gillenormand live here?' Javert asked.

	'Yes. What do you want?'

	'We're bringing back his grandson. He's dead. Go and wake his grandfather. We're bringing him in.'

	Javert, Valjean and the driver carried Marius into the house and laid him gently on a sofa in M. Gillenormand's sitting-room. While one servant ran to find a doctor and another looked for clean sheets, Valjean felt Javert's hand on his arm. He understood, and went downstairs with Javert close behind him. When they had got back into the carriage, however, Valjean said, 'Inspector, will you do one last thing for me before you arrest me?'

	'What is it? 'Javert replied impatiently.

	'Let me go home for a minute. After that, you can do whatever you want with me.'

	Javert was silent for some moments, his chin sunk in the collar of his overcoat. Then he pulled down the window in front of him.

	'Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme,' he told the driver.

	Neither man spoke during the journey. At the end of the rue de l'Homme-Arme, which was too narrow for the carriage to enter, Javert paid the driver and accompanied Valjean to his front door on foot.

	'Go in,' said Javert, with a strange, distant look in his eyes. 'I'll wait for you here.'

	Valjean went into his house and called, 'It's me!' Climbing the stairs, he paused for a moment to look out of the window to see what Javert was doing. But the street was empty; there was no one there.

	The next morning, Inspector Javert's body was discovered floating in the river. The poor man, unable to understand the kindness and gentle nature of the man he had spent his whole life hating, had taken his own life by jumping from a bridge. It was the only way he knew to escape the confusion that was poisoning his heart.

	***

	When M. Gillenormand saw his pale, lifeless-looking grandson lying on the sofa, he shook from head to foot. Leaning against the door for support, he murmured, 'Marius!'

	'He has just been brought here,' said a servant. 'He was on the barricade and

	'He's dead!' cried the old man in a terrible voice. 'The fool! He did this to hurt me, the ungrateful boy. I try to be good to him, and this is how he rewards me!'

	The old man walked to the window and, while he complained to the night about the pain and grief his grandson had caused him, the doctor arrived. After listening to Marius's heart, he organized his removal to a bed in another room, and returned to M. Gillenormand, who was still standing by the window.

	'Will he live?' M. Gillenormand asked, his eyes wild with fear.

	'I don't know,' the doctor replied. 'The wound to his body is not serious, but there are deep cuts on his head. It's difficult to say M. Gillenormand went to Marius's bedside.

	'You heartless boy,' he said angrily. 'A fool who prefers fighting to dancing and having fun. What kind of man are you? Are you mad? But it makes no difference. I too shall die. That makes you a murderer, a cold-hearted killer. I cannot feel grief for you. At that moment, Marius's eyes slowly opened and his gaze rested upon M. Gillenormand.

	'Marius!' the old man cried. 'Marius, my child, grandson! You're alive after all!'



	Chapter fourteen

	The Wedding

	Marius lay for a long time between life and death in a state of fever, endlessly repeating the name of Cosette.

	'He mustn't get excited,' the doctor warned.

	Every day, according to one of the servants, a white-haired, well-dressed gentleman came to ask for news of the sick man.

	Finally, after three months, the doctor announced that Marius was out of danger. But he had to spend the next two months resting because of the damage to his shoulder. M. Gillenormand grew happier as his grandson's condition improved. He did strange, unexpected things, like running up and down stairs without knowing why. He gave his neighbour, a pretty woman, a bunch of flowers, which greatly annoyed her husband.

	Marius, meanwhile, tried to make sense of what had happened to him. He thought about Enjolras and Eponine, and wondered why Cosette's father had been at the barricade. He could not understand why nobody could tell him how he had been saved. All he knew was that he had been brought to his grandfather's house in a carriage. He noticed his grandfather's tenderness towards him, but he could not forget the old man's unfairness and cruelty to his father, who had died penniless and unloved. Most of all, however, he thought about Cosette, and how he could find her again.

	'There's something I have to say to you,' Marius told his grandfather one day.

	'What is it?'

	'I want to get married.'

	'But of course,' the old man laughed.

	'What do you mean - of course?'

	'That's understood. You will have your little girl.'

	'I don't understand,' Marius said, almost speechless with amazement.

	'You will have her,' the old man repeated. 'She comes here every day in the shape of an old man who asks for news of you. While you've been ill, she's spent her time crying and making bandages for you. I know all about her. She lives at Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme. You see, I'm not as unkind as you think. I've found out that she's a charming girl and that she loves you. I knew you were angry with me, and I thought, "What can I do to make him love me?" Then I thought, "I can give him Cosette." I wanted to invite her to see you, but the doctor warned me that you would probably get too excited. So I advise you, dear boy, to eat more meat and get better soon. Then you can marry your Cosette and be happy.'

	Having said this, the old man burst into tears. He held Marius's head to his chest and they cried together.

	'Grandfather,' Marius said at last, 'I'm feeling much better already. When can I see her?'

	'You can see her tomorrow.'

	'Why not today?'

	'All right, I'll fetch her today. You've called me "grandfather"; you've shown me that you love me after all. You've earned your reward!'

	***

	Later that day, Cosette arrived at M. Gillenormand's house. Standing beside her on the doorstep was a white-haired man with a strangely nervous smile.

	M. Gillenormand showed them up to the room where Marius was waiting. Cosette stood in the doorway, overcome with happiness. She wanted to throw herself into Marius's arms, but was unable to move, afraid to show the world that she loved him.

	'Monsieur.' M. Gillenormand addressed Jean Valjean. 'I have the honour, on behalf of my grandson, Marius Pontmercy, to ask for your daughter's hand in marriage.'

	Jean Valjean bowed.

	'Good, then that is agreed,' M. Gillenormand said and, turning to Marius and Cosette, he added, 'My children, you are free to love one another.'

	When they were alone together, Cosette and Marius kissed.

	'Is it really you?' Cosette murmured at last. 'I can't believe it. I'm so happy to see you. I was so excited today that I haven't even dressed up for you. I must look terrible. But why don't you say something? Why are you letting me do all the talking? Do you still love me? Oh, I'm so wild with happiness

	'My love...' Marius whispered.

	***

	The wedding was arranged for February the following year. Jean Valjean arranged everything. Having been a mayor, he knew how to solve an awkward problem: the question of Cosette's real family He told everybody that he was not her father, but her guardian. He also invented a dead family for Cosette, so that everybody believed she was an orphan. Valjean, as her guardian, gave Cosette a large amount of money - half a million francs - but did not tell her that the money was his. He told her that the money came from a man who preferred to remain unknown. It was arranged that the couple, who could not believe their sudden, new-found happiness, would live with M. Gillenormand after the wedding.

	Cosette, accompanied by Jean Valjean, visited Marius every day. Marius did not speak much to Valjean. Despite enjoying an occasional conversation with him, he found something strange about the old man. He could not believe that this was the same man he had seen at the barricade all those months ago - it seemed like a bad dream to him.

	But there were more important things for Marius to think about. Apart from preparing for his wedding, there were two people that he wanted to find. First, there was Thenardier.

	He was, without doubt, a bad man, but Marius had promised his father to find him and help him. He employed agents to find Thenardier, but without success. The only thing they discovered was that Mme Thenardier had died, and that her husband had escaped from prison and disappeared with his surviving daughter, Azelma.

	Second, there was the mysterious stranger who had saved his life. Marius's attempts to find him also ended in failure, and the true story of his escape from the barricade remained a complete mystery to him.

	One evening, when Marius was talking to Cosette and Jean Valjean about the mystery and his unsuccessful attempts to solve it, he became angry with Cosette's guardian's lack of interest in his story.

	'The man was a hero,' Marius said. 'Do you realize, Monsieur, how brave this man was? He rescued me from the field of battle and carried me through the sewers of Paris. He risked his life to save a dying man, and why? He was a total stranger. He did it without any thought of a reward. Oh, I wish Cosette's money were mine.'

	'It is yours,' Valjean reminded him.

	'I would give it all,' said Marius,'to find that man!'

	Jean Valjean was silent.

	***

	Cosette and Marius made a handsome couple on their wedding day. All previous unhappiness was forgotten as they kissed in the church, watched proudly by M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean. There were flowers everywhere when they returned to M. Gillenormand's house for the wedding feast. It was the happiest night of Cosette's life, spoilt only by one thing: the fact that her guardian - whom she still thought of as her father - went home before the feast had started, saying that he felt ill. But Cosette was not unhappy for long. She had Marius, and she would be happy with him for the rest of her life!

	Jean Valjean, meanwhile, went home, lit his candle and went upstairs to bed. That night, however, he was unable to sleep. He remembered the little girl he had rescued from the Thenardiers ten years earlier, and felt sad that he was no longer the most important man in her life. Another man was the centre of her universe. He was proud of having helped to bring her happiness with Marius, but another thing troubled his soul: the fact that nobody, not even Cosette, knew the truth about him. That he was Jean Valjean, a criminal who had spent nineteen years in prison and who had stolen silver candlesticks from a trusting and kind-hearted bishop. He knew that if he told Cosette and Marius the truth, he would spoil everybody's happiness and he would lose their love and respect. On the other hand, if he continued to lie about his past, he would lose his own soul. What could he do?

	***

	The next day Valjean visited M. Gillenormand's house, and asked to speak to Marius in private. Marius hugged Valjean warmly, addressed him as 'father' and invited him to lunch, but Valjean shook his head and said, 'Monsieur, I have something to tell you.'

	Marius listened quietly as Valjean told him everything about his life. Finally, in a state of shock and confusion, the young man said, 'Why have you told me all this? No one forced you to.'

	'If I had continued to keep my secret to myself, I would have destroyed my own heart,' Valjean replied. 'Besides, I belong to no family. Cosette was the only family I ever had. Everything ended for me when she married you yesterday. She is happy with the man she loves. I tried to persuade myself that it would be better not to admit the truth about my past, but it was no use. I could not silence the voice that speaks to me when I am alone.'

	Neither of them spoke for several minutes. Then Marius murmured, 'Poor Cosette. When she hears

	'But you must promise not to tell her!' Valjean interrupted. 'She'll be heart-broken if she hears the truth about me. I don't think I could bear it... '

	He sank into an armchair and buried his face in his hands. 'Don't worry,' Marius said at last. 'I'll keep your secret. But I think it would be better if you stopped seeing her.'

	'I understand,' Valjean said, rising to leave. But at the door he half-turned and said, 'Monsieur, if you will permit me, I would like to come and see her. I wouldn't come often or stay very long. We could meet in that little room on the ground floor. Please Monsieur, if I can't see Cosette again, I'll have nothing left to live for. Besides, if I suddenly stopped visiting, people would become suspicious and begin to talk

	'You can come every evening,' said Marius. 'Monsieur, you are very kind,' said Jean Valjean, shaking Marius's hand and leaving the room.



	Chapter fifteen

	The Truth at Last

	Marius kept his promise about not telling Cosette, and Valjean visited her every evening in a small room on the ground floor. It was cold and damp, but a fire had been lit and two armchairs had been placed in front of it. At first, Cosette could not understand why Valjean refused to meet her upstairs. When he refused to kiss her cheek, she began to feel unhappy, afraid that she had done something to offend him. She pressed his hands in hers and held them to her lips.

	'Please, please be kind!' she begged. 'I want you to come and live with us. You'll always be my father and I'm not going to let you go.'

	He released his hands.

	'You mustn't call me "father" any more,' he told her. 'You must call me "Monsieur Jean".'

	'I don't understand,' she said, becoming angry. 'This is ridiculous. You're upsetting me very much, and I don't know why you're being so cruel.'

	'You don't need a father any more. You have a husband.'

	'What a thing to say!' Cosette replied. 'Are you angry with me because I'm happy?'

	'Cosette,' he said, 'your happiness is the only thing that matters to me. You're happy now, and so my work is complete.'

	With these words, he picked up his hat and left.

	Jean Valjean continued his evening visits, but the relationship between himself and Cosette became cooler and more distant. She stopped calling him 'father' or asking him questions. As 'Monsieur Jean', he gradually became a different person to her, and she began not to depend on him for her happiness.

	Valjean would sit looking at Cosette in silence, or would talk about incidents from their past. One evening in April, he called at the usual time but was told that Cosette had gone out with her husband. He waited in the small, damp room for an hour before sadly returning home. Over the next few days, his visits began to be interrupted by servants calling Cosette to dinner. When he arrived, he discovered that the fire had not been lit, and the armchairs had been left near the door. One evening he discovered there were no chairs in the room at all - he and Cosette had to stand in the cold for their whole meeting. Valjean realized what was happening; Marius was telling the servants not to make him welcome any more. That night he went home in despair, and the next evening he did not come at all.

	When Valjean did not appear for the second evening, Cosette sent a servant to his house to ask if he was well. Valjean replied that he was very well, but that he had business to attend to. He did not return to the house again, and Cosette was too busy with married life to think too much about him. She did not realize that, every evening, Valjean would walk slowly from his house until he reached the corner of the street where she lived. He would then stare at the house for several minutes, tears rolling down his cheeks, before turning round and slowly returning home.

	***

	Marius thought it was right to exclude Valjean from Cosette's life. He achieved this without cruelty, but without weakness. Apart from the details about his life that Valjean had confessed to him, he knew that Valjean had killed Inspector Javert at the barricade. His private investigations into the old man's past had also revealed an even more disgusting fact. He had discovered that Valjean's money really belonged to somebody called Monsieur Madeleine, a wealthy manufacturer from Montreuil who had mysteriously disappeared. He persuaded Cosette, therefore, not to use any of the money her guardian had given her, and to live on the money that he had started to earn as a lawyer. Cosette had not been happy about this. She could not understand why her father, as she still thought of Valjean, had stopped visiting her. She still loved him in her heart. But she loved her husband even more, and she gradually became used to not depending on the old man for her happiness.

	One evening a servant brought Marius a letter, saying, 'The writer is waiting in the hall.'

	The smell of tobacco and the handwriting on the envelope was so familiar that Marius immediately thought of the Jondrettes. He read the letter quickly. It was signed 'Thenard', and was asking for money. Marius could not believe his luck. He had tried without success to find the man who had saved his father's lite at Waterloo, and now the man had come to him! He immediately asked the servant to show the man in.

	However, Marius had a shock when he saw the man - he did not recognize him at all! He was an old man with a big nose, glasses and neat grey hair. He was wearing smart black clothes, and a gold watch chain hung from his jacket pocket.

	'What do you want?' Marius asked coldly, as the stranger bowed to him.

	The stranger explained in great detail how he used to work for the government in foreign countries and that, now he was retired, he wanted to move to South America with his wife and daughter. Unfortunately, it was a long journey, and he needed money.

	'What has that to do with me?'

	'Has M. Pontmercy not read my letter?'

	Marius had only read the letter quickly, and could not remember the details, so he said, 'Go on.'

	'I have a secret to tell you, M. Pontmercy,' the stranger said. 'I'll tell you the first part for nothing. I think you'll be interested;

	'Well?'

	'The man you think is your wife's guardian is a murderer and a thief. His name is Jean Valjean.'

	'I know that.'

	'Did you know that he spent nineteen years in prison?'

	'I know that too.'

	The stranger narrowed his eyes, trying to hide his disappointment and anger at Marius's calmness. Then he gave a strange smile.

	'I have more information to tell you. It concerns money that belongs to your wife. It's a remarkable secret and I'll sell the information to you for 20,000 francs.'

	'I know this secret already,' Marius said, 'just as I knew the others.'

	'10,000 francs?'

	'I repeat, you have nothing to tell me.'

	'But I need to eat, Monsieur!' the visitor said, losing confidence. 'I'll tell you for twenty francs.'

	'I know it already,' Marius said. 'I know everything. I even know your real name. It's Thenardier.'

	The visitor laughed, but Marius went on, 'You're also Jondrette. And you once had an inn in Montfermeil.'

	'I deny it!'

	'You're a completely rotten man, but I'll give you this.' Marius took a banknote out of his pocket and threw it in the stranger's face.

	'Thank you, M. Pontmercy!' the man said, examining the note. '500 francs! That's real money. Oh well, I suppose we can relax.'

	With those words, he removed his false nose, glasses and neat grey wig.

	'M. Pontmercy is absolutely right,' he said, changing his voice. 'I am Thenardier.'

	He waited for a few seconds to see Marius's reaction.

	Marius, meanwhile, was grateful for finally having the chance to help Thenardier, and therefore to keep the promise he had made to his father. Thenardier's presence, however, offered him another opportunity; it gave him the chance to solve the mystery of Cosette's fortune.

	'Thenardier,' he said. 'Shall I tell you the secret that you were planning to sell me? I, too, have sources of information, and probably know more about the subject than you do. Jean Valjean, as you say, is a murderer and a thief. He's a thief because he robbed a wealthy manufacturer and mayor of Montreuil, M. Madeleine. Jean Valjean, who knew the mayor's background, reported him to the police and took advantage of his arrest to take over half a million francs from his Paris bank. The manager of the bank told me this himself. And he murdered the policeman, Javert. I know this because I was there at the time.'

	Thenardier looked puzzled for a moment, then said, 'Monsieur, I think you are mistaken.'

	'What! Are you denying what I said? Those are facts!'

	'They are incorrect, and I do not like to hear a man unjustly accused. Jean Valjean did not rob M. Madeleine, nor did he kill Javert.'

	'How do you know?'

	'First, he did not kill M. Madeleine because he was M. Madeleine! And second, he did not kill Javert because Javert killed himself. He killed himself by jumping into the river.'

	'What proof do you have?' Marius said, wide-eyed with disbelief.

	'I have all the proof here,' Thenardier said, producing an envelope in which there were several documents and newspaper articles. 'I've spent a long time discovering the truth about Jean Valjean.'

	Marius studied the documents carefully, then looked up with a smile of joy. 'But he's a splendid man! The fortune was really his, and he's not a murderer or thief at all! He's a hero and a saint!'

	'He's a thief and a murderer,'Thenardier said quietly.

	'What do you mean?'

	'I told you that I do not like to see a man accused unjustly, but I do like to see a man punished for crimes he has committed.'

	'And what crimes are those?'

	Thenardier sat down and told Marius about the time he had helped Valjean to escape from the Paris sewer.

	'He was carrying the body of a man he had robbed and killed,' Thenardier said. 'Look, I have a piece of cloth from the dead man's coat as proof.'

	He produced a muddy piece of cloth and showed it to Marius, who immediately went pale and rose unsteadily to his feet. As Thenardier continued to talk, Marius opened a cupboard door and took out a coat.

	'That man was me!' Marius cried. 'And here is the coat I was wearing!'

	Thenardier stared at the coat and the cloth in his hands, speechless with fear. He was even more surprised when, instead of chasing him out of the room, Marius ran towards him and pressed several thousand-franc notes into his hand.

	'You're a terrible man,' Marius said. 'A thief and a liar. You came here to destroy a man, but you have done the opposite. If you hadn't saved my father's life at Waterloo, I'd report you to the police. I know that your wife is dead, but take the money and start a new life in America with your daughter. When you arrive there, I'll send you another 20,000 francs. Now get out. I never want to see you again!'

	When Thenardier had left, unable to believe his good fortune, Marius ran to find Cosette and told her everything immediately.

	'We must go to him at once,' Marius said. 'He was the man who saved my life. We must waste no time!'

	Minutes later, he and Cosette were travelling in a carriage to Number 7, rue de l'Homme-Arme.

	***

	Jean Valjean looked up when he heard the knock on his door and called in a weak voice, 'Come in.'

	The door opened and Marius and Cosette appeared. Cosette rushed to the chair where Jean Valjean was sitting.

	'Father!' she cried, falling into his arms.

	'So you've forgiven me?' Valjean whispered, hugging Cosette to him and turning to Marius.

	'Cosette, did you hear what he said?' Marius cried, tears of shame and guilt rolling down his cheeks. 'He asked me to forgive him. And do you know what he did? He saved my life and he brought me back to you. He came to the barricade to save me, just as he saved Javert. He carried me on his back through the sewers of Paris, to bring me to you. Oh Cosette, I feel so ashamed of the way I've treated him!'

	'You have no need to say all this,' Valjean murmured.

	'Why didn't you say it yourself?' Marius demanded. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were M. Madeleine and that you saved Javert's life at the barricade? Why didn't you tell me that I owed you my life?'

	'Because I thought it would be better to break away. If you had known the truth, you would have felt obliged to be good to me, a worthless criminal. That would have upset everything.'

	'What or whom would it have upset?' Marius said. 'Well, we're not going to allow you to stay here on your own. You're going to come home with us. You're Cosette's father and mine. I won't allow you to spend another day here.'

	'And you can't refuse this time,' Cosette agreed, sitting on Jean Valjean's lap and kissing his forehead. 'There's a carriage waiting for you. I'm kidnapping you - by force, if necessary!'

	Jean Valjean listened as she described the view from the room that would be his, the beauty of the garden, the singing of the birds, but he was listening more to the music of her voice than to the meaning of her words. Finally, he said, 'Yes, it would be delightful, but

	Cosette, frightened, took his two hands in hers.

	'Your hands are so cold,' she said. 'Are you ill? Are you in pain?'

	'No,' said Valjean. 'I'm not in pain. But

	'But what?'

	'I'm going to die soon.'

	'Father, no!' Cosette cried. 'You're going to live! You must live, do you understand?'

	Marius and Cosette both did their best to raise Valjean's spirits, to show him how much they loved and needed him, to fill him with the strength and the desire to live again. But it was too late. Valjean smiled, his eyes shining with love and happiness, but he was beginning to lose strength.

	'To die is nothing,' he murmured. 'But it is terrible not to live.'

	Then, taking Cosette's sleeve and pressing it to his lips, he said, 'Come close to me, both of you. I love you dearly. How sweet it is to die like this. And you love me too, dear Cosette. You'll feel some grief for me, but not too much. I want you to have no great sorrows. You must enjoy life, my children. I'm leaving the two candlesticks by the bed to Cosette. They're made of silver, but to me they are pure gold. I don't know whether the person who gave them to me is pleased as he looks down on me from above. I've done my best. You mustn't forget, my children, that, despite my money, I am one of the poor.'

	As he spoke, Valjean's breathing became more painful and he had difficulty moving his arms. But as the weakness of his body increased, his spirit grew in strength. The light of an unknown world was shining brightly in his eyes.

	'Now, Cosette,' he breathed softly, 'the time has come for me to tell you your mother's name. It was Fantine. You must not forget it. Your mother loved you greatly and she suffered greatly. She was as rich in sorrow as you are in happiness. That is how God balances things out. He watches us all from above and knows what he is doing among his splendid stars. And now I must leave you, my children. Love one another always. There is nothing else that matters in this world except love.'

	Cosette and Marius fell to their knees on either side of him, holding back their tears. Jean Valjean's hands rested on their bowed heads, and did not move again. He lay back with his head turned to the sky, the light from the two silver candlesticks falling on his smiling, peaceful face.



	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	Chapter one

	A Wedding

	'Edith,' said Margaret gently, 'Edith!'

	But her cousin had fallen asleep. She lay curled up on the sofa in one of the sitting-rooms of the house in Harley Street, looking very lovely in her white dress. The two girls had grown up together, but Edith was getting married in a few days, and it was only now, when she was going to lose her, that Margaret realised how beautiful and sweet her cousin was. They had been talking about Edith's future life on the Greek island of Corfu, where she would live with Captain Lennox after the wedding. But now she had fallen asleep, and Margaret, who had wanted to discuss her own future, had no one to talk to.

	Despite the lack of a listener, Margaret's thoughts were happy ones. For the last ten years, her Aunt Shaw's house in London had been her home. But soon she was going to return to the country vicarage where her parents lived, and where she had spent her holidays. She was looking forward to the change, although she regretted the separation from her aunt and cousin.

	She was thinking dreamily of the vicarage when Mrs Shaw called out from the room next door. She had invited some neighbours to dinner, and the ladies were talking in the sitting-room while their husbands remained in the dining-room.

	'Edith! Edith!'

	Margaret rose and went next door.

	'Edith is asleep, Aunt Shaw. Can I help?'

	All the ladies said, 'Poor child!' on receiving this news, and the little dog in Mrs Shaw's arms began to bark excitedly.

	'Be quiet, Tiny, you naughty little girl! I wanted to ask Edith to bring down her Indian shawls. Would you mind fetching them, Margaret?'

	Margaret went up to the room at the top of the house where the shawls were kept. Nine years ago, when she had first arrived in Harley Street, this room had been her bedroom. She remembered her first meal up there, away from her father and aunt, who were eating below. Margaret had always had her meals with her father and mother. The eighteen-year-old girl remembered how she had cried that first night, hiding her face under the bedclothes. Now she had learnt to love her bedroom, and she looked round regretfully, knowing that she was leaving it forever.

	She carried the shawls downstairs, and as Edith was still asleep, her aunt asked her to put them on. The long, heavy shawls looked better on Margaret, who was tall and stately, than they would have looked on Edith, who was much shorter. Mrs Shaw was adjusting a shawl around Margaret's shoulders when the door opened and Captain Lennox's brother, Mr Henry Lennox, came in. Margaret looked at Mr Lennox with a laughing face, certain that he would be amused by her situation.

	Almost immediately, Edith appeared, shaking her pretty curls. She had a hundred questions to ask Henry, but he soon came and sat next to Margaret, as she had known he would. Margaret's face lit up with an honest, open smile. Henry Lennox liked and disliked almost the same things that she did, and now she was certain to have a pleasant evening.

	'Well, I suppose you are all very busy indeed - with ladies' business, I mean. Very different to my business, the law.'

	'Indian shawls are very lovely.'

	'And their prices are good, too. But is this not your last dinner party before the wedding on Thursday? You have been very busy recently.'

	'Yes,' replied Margaret. 'I wonder if it is possible to have a quiet time before a wedding.'

	'What would your wedding be like?'

	'Oh, I have never thought much about it. I would like it to be a fine summer morning; and to walk to church through shady trees. It is natural for me to think of Helstone church, rather than a London one.'

	'Tell me about Helstone. Is it a village or a town?'

	'Oh, I don't think you could call it a village. There is a church, with a few houses near it - cottages, really - with roses growing all over them.'

	'It sounds like a village in a children's story.'

	'It is,' replied Margaret eagerly. 'It's like a village in a poem.'

	'It sounds lovely. What is the vicarage like?'

	'Oh, please don't ask me to describe my home. It's much too difficult.'

	'Margaret, don't be cross with me!'

	'I'm not cross with you,' said Margaret, looking directly at him with her large, soft eyes.

	'Then tell me what you do there. How do you fill your day?'

	'I walk a lot. We have no horse, not even for Father.'

	'Do you go to dances?'

	'Oh, no, nothing like that. We don't have the money.'

	'I can see you won't tell me anything. Before the holiday ends, I think I will visit you, and see what you really do there.'

	'I hope you will. Then you will see how beautiful Helstone is.'

	Tall, handsome Captain Lennox, who had just arrived, came over to greet his brother, with Edith smiling proudly by his side. The two men shook hands and Mrs Shaw welcomed the Captain in her gentle way. Her husband had died many years ago, but she lived a very comfortable life. Lately, she had been worrying about her health, and she started a conversation with the Captain about the possibility of spending the winter in Italy, where it was warmer.

	Mr Henry Lennox leaned against the wall, amused by the family scene. Unlike his brother, he was not handsome, but he had a clever, interesting face and people liked him. He was enjoying watching the two cousins as they arranged the table for tea. Edith was doing her best to show the Captain what a good wife she would be, but he noticed that Margaret was much more efficient.



	Chapter two

	Helstone

	It was the second half of July when Margaret returned home. The trees were a dark, shadowy green; the plants below caught the sunlight as it came through the leaves, and the weather was hot and still. Margaret took long walks with her father, taking pleasure in the sweet forest smells and the wild, free-living creatures that she saw there. This life - at least, these walks - were just as Margaret had hoped. She loved her forest and had good friends there; she nursed their babies, read to the old people and brought food to the sick. Her outdoor life was perfect. Her indoor life had its disadvantages.

	On arriving home she had immediately realised that all was not as it should be. Her mother, always so kind and loving towards her, from time to time seemed deeply discontented. Mrs Hale said that the forest, so near to the house, affected her health, but her biggest complaints were the family's lack of money and her husband's low position in the Church of England. When she mentioned the subject, Mr Hale would reply sadly that as long as he could do his duty in little Helstone, he was thankful, but there were lines of anxiety on his face that had not been there before, and each day he seemed more lost and confused.

	Margaret was unprepared for these long hours of discontent. She had known that she would have to give up many luxuries when she returned to Helstone, and she had quite enjoyed the idea. There had been a few complaints from her mother when Margaret had spent her holidays at home before, but because the memory of those times was generally happy, she had forgotten the small, less pleasant details.

	Autumn rains came in the second half of September and Margaret often had to stay in the house. Helstone was at some distance from any neighbours of a similar social position.

	'It is undoubtedly one of the most isolated places in England,' said Mrs Hale sadly. 'If only we were within walking distance of the Stansfields and the Gormans.'

	'The Gormans?' said Margaret. 'Are those the Gormans who made their fortune in trade in Southampton? I'm glad we don't visit them. I don't like people in trade. I think it's much better for us to know poor country people, people who do not claim to be better than they are.'

	'You must not be so hard to please, Margaret, dear,' said Mrs Hale, secretly thinking of a young and handsome Mr Gorman whom she had once met.

	'That's not true! I like all those who work on the land. I'm sure you don't want me to admire butchers and bakers - people like that, do you?'

	'But the Gormans were neither butchers nor bakers, but very respectable carriage-builders.'

	'Nevertheless, carriage-building is a trade, and rather a useless one, in my opinion. I would much prefer to walk than travel in a carriage.'

	And Margaret did walk, in spite of the weather; she was so happy outdoors, at her father's side, that she almost danced. But the evenings were rather difficult to fill pleasantly. Immediately after tea her father disappeared into his small library, and she and her mother were left alone. Her mother had never enjoyed books much, and when Mrs Hale began to compare her sister's comfortable life in London with her own life at the vicarage, Margaret would stop talking and listen to the rain as it fell on the sitting-room window. Once or twice she wondered if she could ask about a subject of great importance to her - her older brother Frederick. He had joined the navy some years ago, and had taken part in a mutiny, with the result that he was now unable to return to England, as he would be arrested if he did. Margaret very much wanted to ask where Frederick was now and what he was doing, but an awareness that her mother's bad health dated from the time of the mutiny made her unwilling to do so. Similarly, her father's anxious face made her pause and turn away from the subject each time she approached it.

	Frederick's room was kept exactly as he had left it and was regularly cleaned by Dixon, Mrs Hale's servant. Dixon lovingly remembered the day when she had first been employed to look after pretty Miss Beresford, as Mrs Hale had been called then. Dixon had never thought that Mr Hale was good enough for her dear lady and considered that he had caused her much heartache; she saw herself as Mrs Hale's only protector. Frederick had always been her favourite and her rather stiff manner softened a little when she went in each week to tidy his room.

	Margaret felt sure that there had been some news of Frederick, unknown to her mother, which was making her kind and gentle father anxious. Often, in conversation, his mind seemed elsewhere, and he spent more time than usual in his study. But when fine weather came in the second half of October, her worries disappeared and she thought of nothing except the beauty of the forest. She was preparing to take her artist's notebook and go drawing in the forest when Dixon threw the sitting-room door open and announced, 'Mr Henry Lennox.'

	The sun shone through the window onto Margaret's face as she walked forwards to shake hands with him.

	'I am so glad you have come,' she said.

	'Did I not say that I would?' he asked. 'I have a little note from Edith. Ah, here it is.'

	'Oh! Thank you!' exclaimed Margaret, and went to tell her mother that Mr Lennox had arrived.

	When she had gone, Mr Lennox began to look around in his sharp-eyed way. The little sitting-room was looking its best in the morning sunlight; the window was open and roses crept around the corner, while the garden was bright with flowers of every colour. But the brightness outside made the colours inside seem faded. The carpet was old and the house was smaller than he had expected, as Margaret herself seemed so queenly.

	'It's as she said, they have very little money,' he thought.

	Margaret returned with her mother, who greeted Mr Lennox with great friendliness, and it was agreed that the couple should go to draw in the forest and then return for lunch. Margaret led Mr Lennox through the forest to two little cottages; there, they took out their notebooks and began to draw the pretty scene. When the time came to show each other what they had done, Margaret discovered that Mr Lennox had drawn her.

	'I hardly dare tell you how much I like this picture,' he said.

	Margaret turned away to pack up her notebook and pencils, and Mr Lennox was not quite sure whether she had heard his words. They returned to the vicarage, and the conversation at lunch flowed quietly and pleasantly. After the meal, he suggested that they should walk in the garden.

	'What a perfect life you seem to live here,' he said, looking up at the tall forest trees that enclosed the garden like a nest.

	'Please remember that our skies are not always blue. We have rain and even storms sometimes! Although I do think that Helstone is about as perfect as any place in the world.'

	'I almost wish, Margaret,' said Mr Lennox, and then hesitated.

	It was so unusual for the clever lawyer to hesitate that Margaret looked up at him questioningly.

	'Margaret,' Mr Lennox continued, taking her hand, 'I wish you didn't like Helstone so much and that you missed your friends in London more - enough to make you listen more kindly to someone who is not wealthy, it is true, but who does love you, Margaret.'

	Margaret made a strong effort to be calm, and then said, 'I did not know that you cared for me in that way. I have always thought of you as a friend.'

	'But may I hope that at some time you will think of me as a lover?'

	Margaret was silent for a minute or two, trying to discover the truth in her own heart before she replied. Then she said, 'I have only ever thought of you as a friend - I am sure I could never think of you as anything else. Let us both forget that this conversation has taken place.'

	Mr Lennox paused before he replied. Then in a colder voice, he said, 'Of course, as this conversation is rather unpleasant to you, I will try to forget it.'

	'You are upset,' Margaret said sadly, 'but how can I help it?'

	She looked so sad as she said this that he struggled for a moment with his real disappointment, and then said more cheerfully, but still with a little hardness in his voice, 'I am not known to be a romantic man - and the only time that I allow myself to be so, I am rejected. It was madness to think that I - a poor lawyer - could hope to marry.'

	The whole tone of these words annoyed Margaret and reminded her of why she could not accept him, and it was fortunate that Mr Hale appeared just then, and a lighter conversation began. Margaret said little, wondering when Mr Lennox would go. He too was anxious to leave, but to save his self-respect began talking in a bored kind of way about his life in London. Mr Hale was puzzled; this was not the man he had met in the city and at lunch that day. It was a relief to all of them when Mr Lennox said that he needed to leave immediately in order to catch the five o'clock train.

	At the last moment, Henry Lennox's real self broke through.

	'Margaret, don't dislike me - I have a heart, though I pretend that I do not. I believe I love you more than ever - if I do not hate you - for the disdain on your face as you have listened to me during this last half hour. Goodbye, Margaret - Margaret!'

	He was gone. The house was locked up for the evening. Margaret sat alone by the fire in the sitting-room, with unlit candles on the table behind her, thinking about the day, the happy walk, the drawing in the forest, the cheerful lunch, and the uncomfortable, miserable walk in the garden. She felt very unhappy that she had had to refuse him, but what else could she have done when, moments after her refusal, he had spoken as if success in life was the only thing that mattered to him? Oh dear! She could have loved him so much if only he had been different. Then she thought that, after all, perhaps he had talked in that cold, hard way to hide his disappointment. She was still considering this when Mr Hale entered, sighing deeply.

	'Margaret,' he said at last, in a sudden, desperate way, 'can you come into my study? I want to speak to you about something very serious.'

	In the study, Mr Hale made Margaret take a chair next to him. He stirred the fire and then said shakily, 'Margaret! I am going to leave Helstone.'

	'Leave Helstone, Father! But why?'

	'Because I can no longer be a clergyman in the Church of England.'

	Margaret's immediate response was a feeling of shock and disbelief. 'Why? Why can you no longer be a clergyman? Is it because of Frederick?'

	'It is not about Frederick. It is all me. For a long time now I have had serious doubts about the authority of the Church.

	These doubts have torn me in two and are so great that I feel I have no choice. I must leave.'

	'But Father, have you truly considered the consequences?' asked Margaret, bursting into tears.

	Mr Hale rose and walked up and down the room, talking to himself in a low voice. Finally, he said, 'Margaret, I have thought about it for a long time. I must do what my heart and mind tell me. I have arranged things so that we will be leaving Helston in a fortnight.'

	Margaret sat as still as stone. 'In a fortnight! Where will we go?'

	'To Milton-Northern,' her father answered lifelessly.

	'Milton-Northern! The manufacturing town in Darkshire?'

	'Yes,' he answered in the same depressed way. 'You remember Mr Bell, an old friend of mine at Oxford University - he teaches at the university now. I wrote to him about my troubles. His home town is Milton-Northern and he owns property there which has greatly increased in value since Milton has become such a large manufacturing town. He feels certain that I can earn a living there as a private tutor.'

	'A private tutor!' cried Margaret scornfully. 'Are manufacturers interested in studying Ancient Greek literature?'

	'Oh,' said Mr Hale, 'some of them really seem to be fine fellows. Mr Bell has recommended me to a Mr Thornton, a tenant of his, and a very intelligent man, apparently.'

	'And Mother knows nothing about this?' asked Margaret fearfully.

	'Nothing. Poor, poor Maria! Margaret - I dare not tell her!'

	'No,' said Margaret sadly, 'I will do it. Oh, Father,' she cried, 'tell me it is all a terrible dream! You do not really mean it!'

	Mr Hale sat perfectly still as she spoke. Then he looked her in the face, and said slowly, 'You must not deceive yourself, Margaret. I do mean it.'

	He looked at her for some moments and she gazed back. Then she rose and, without a look or a word, left the room.

	That night, Margaret sat by her bedroom window, looking out at the brightly lit church, too full of sorrow to cry, but with a cold pain in her heart that made her feel old and hopeless; the afternoon spent with Mr Lennox seemed like a dream. The hard reality was that because her father had doubts about the authority of the Church, their whole life was going to change. Margaret felt as she never had before, completely alone. That night she dreamt that Henry Lennox fell from a high tree and was killed. In the morning she woke feeling exhausted, and the awful reality came back to her.

	At breakfast, the fine autumn morning made Mrs Hale feel particularly well and she talked happily, planning visits to the villagers. Mr Hale left, saying he would be out for the whole day. Unlike her father, who would have postponed telling the bad news as long as possible, Margaret took a deep breath and asked her mother to walk with her in the garden. There, Margaret told her about Mr Hale's decisions and his plan to leave Helstone.

	At first her mother did not believe her. 'He would surely have told me before this!' she cried.

	But when Margaret insisted that they were going to leave Helstone in a fortnight, her mother started to cry quietly, unable to bear the thought of living in a manufacturing town.

	'But think of the shame!' she whispered. 'Your father is going to leave the Church! No one we know will want to know us!'

	For the rest of that day, Margaret never left her mother. When evening came and Mr Hale returned, his face grey and fearful, his wife threw herself on him and burst into tears, crying, 'Oh, Richard, Richard, you should have told us sooner!'

	On hearing this, Margaret left the room and ran up to her bedroom, where she cried bitterly for many hours. But heartbroken as she was, it immediately became clear that her parents were depending on her to make the necessary arrangements for the move to Milton-Northern. Mr Hale was so depressed that he was unable to make any decisions, while Mrs Hale now became really ill and had to spend most of each day in bed. A fortnight was a very short time, and Margaret felt that a great weight had suddenly been thrown upon her shoulders. However, with Dixon's help she began to plan the move.



	Chapter three

	The Move to Milton-Northern

	The Hale family left Helstone early one morning to take a train to London. The vicarage, half-covered with roses, looked lovelier than ever in the morning sun and they found it hard to believe they would never see it again. Margaret, who was looking very pale, appeared calm, but her heart was aching. She leaned back in her seat and shut her eyes, and the tears rolled slowly down her cheeks.

	They spent a night in London at a quiet hotel and the next day took the train to Heston, a small seaside town about twenty miles from Milton-Northern. Margaret's plan was that her mother and Dixon could stay there while she and her father went to Milton-Northern to look for a house. They found clean, cheerful rooms in Heston, and she felt able to rest at last.

	But the future must be met, however difficult it may be. One morning, Margaret and her father set off for Milton-Northern. As they approached the town they saw that a dark grey cloud hung over it, and the air started to taste and smell slightly of smoke. Soon they were travelling through long, straight streets of small brick houses. Huge factories sent out clouds of black smoke, and the streets were crowded with people.

	They found their hotel, which was near the centre of the town, and left immediately to begin their search. There was not much money to spend on rent, and it was difficult to find a house that was big enough for their needs.

	After some hours, Margaret said, 'I think we should go back to the second house, the one in Crampton - that was the name of the suburb, I think:

	'But the colours! And the wallpaper!'

	'Surely you can ask the landlord to repaper one or two of the rooms? And the bookshelves will hide some of the walls.'

	'Then you think we should take it? If you do, I will take you back to the hotel and you can have lunch and rest while I visit the landlord. I only hope he will agree to repaper the rooms.'

	As Margaret entered the hotel, a waiter came to tell her that Mr Thornton was waiting in their rooms to see them. Margaret went in to meet him in her usual fearless way; she was used to London society and was not at all shy. Mr Thornton was much more surprised and uncomfortable than she was. Instead of a quiet, middle-aged clergyman, here was a young woman who was very different to those he usually met. She wore a simple, dark silk dress and a large Indian shawl that made her look like an eastern queen. Her gaze was direct and completely uninterested.

	'Mr Thornton, I believe,' said Margaret. 'Will you sit down? My father will return soon. He has gone to see Mr Donkins, the landlord of a house in Crampton that my father wishes to take.'

	Mr Thornton had promised Mr Bell that he would do his best to help Mr Hale, and he had been to look at the house in Crampton. He had thought that it was perfect, but now that he had met Margaret, he was not so sure. Margaret's short upper lip, strong chin and the way she moved her head and body always made strangers think that she was haughty. She sat directly opposite Mr Thornton, and he had to admit that she was very beautiful, with her white neck and graceful curves.

	But her obvious lack of interest made him feel like a rough, uncivilised fellow, and he was not sure he liked her. He thought that her quiet, calm manner was rather disdainful, and he was telling himself that he would leave, when Mr Hale entered and apologised in his pleasant way for not being there to meet him.

	The two men began to talk about their friend, Mr Bell, and Margaret moved to the window and watched the street.

	'Margaret,' said Mr Hale suddenly, 'the landlord refused to change the wallpaper.'

	'Oh dear!' she said and began to think of ways of hiding it.

	Her father invited Mr Thornton to have lunch with them, but since Margaret did not add her own invitation, Mr Thornton felt unable to accept. He left, feeling more uncomfortable than ever in his life before.

	When they returned to Heston, Mrs Hale was full of questions about how they had spent the day.

	'And what is Mr Thornton like?' she asked.

	'Oh, I don't know,' said Margaret, who was feeling tired, 'He is a tall, broad-shouldered man of about thirty, I think, with a face that is not ugly but not handsome either. He is not quite a gentleman - but one would not expect that.'

	'He is not a coarse man,' said her father.

	'Oh no!' said Margaret. 'His expression is much too powerful and determined. He looks like what he is - a great tradesman.'

	'Don't call the Milton cotton manufacturers tradesmen, Margaret,' said her father. 'They are very different.'

	'Are they? I use the word for those who have something to sell. Oh, Mother! You must prepare yourself for the sitting-room wallpaper! Pink and blue roses, with yellow leaves!'

	But when they moved to the house in Milton, the landlord had changed the wallpaper. They did not know that when Mr Thornton, the wealthy manufacturer, asked for something to be done, people hurried to obey.

	It was difficult for the family to feel comfortable in their new home. The thick yellow November fogs crept up to the windows and through every open door. Mrs Hale was miserable and caught a bad cold. Mr Hale was equally miserable and came to Margaret for sympathy, but she was unable to comfort him. The move to Milton had spent nearly all their money. Here they were and here they must remain. At night, when Margaret realised this, she felt quite despairing. The heavy, smoky air hung in her bedroom, and all she could see from her window was a blank wall. A letter from Edith arrived describing her new life in her pretty house overlooking the sea; it was a life without any problems. Margaret wondered if her old friends thought about her at all. What would her life have been like if she had agreed to marry Henry Lennox? But she knew he would have found it very difficult to accept her father's changed position in society.

	Mr Hale found several pupils, recommended by either Mr Bell or Mr Thornton. They were mostly schoolboys, and Mr Thornton was probably the oldest of Mr Hale's students. He was certainly the favourite. Mr Hale quoted his opinions so often that it became a family joke to wonder how much time the men spent studying, when so much time was spent in conversation.

	One of Margaret's tasks was to find a servant to help Dixon in the kitchen. The rough girls who had replied to their advertisements were not at all suitable, so Margaret went up and down the Milton streets, visiting shops, looking for a girl who Dixon would accept. But all the girls she saw preferred to work at a mill, where the wages were better. In London, when Margaret went out walking, she had always been accompanied by a servant, but here she walked alone, among the crowds who poured in and out of the factories. They came rushing along, with loud voices and fearless faces, and at first they frightened her. The girls commented on her clothes and sometimes even touched them, but they were not unfriendly. The undisguised admiration of the men upset her, however, as she had never received this kind of attention before.

	She was returning home one day when a middle-aged worker said as he passed her, 'A face as pretty as yours should always be smiling.' The man looked so weighed down with worries that she smiled at him and he smiled back. Whenever they passed each other again they did not speak, but a silent recognition grew between them. Once or twice she saw him walking with an unhealthy-looking girl, apparently his daughter.

	One morning in May, she had been to pick flowers in the countryside and was walking back home when she met the couple. She offered the flowers to the girl, and the girl's pale blue eyes lit up as she took them.

	'Thank you, miss, that's kind of you,' said the man. 'You're not from round here, I don't think.'

	'No,' said Margaret, half sighing. 'I come from the south.'

	The girl was walking very slowly and Margaret turned to her and said sweetly, 'I am afraid you are not very strong.'

	'No,' said the girl, 'and I never will be.'

	'Spring is here,' said Margaret.

	'It won't do me any good.'

	'She's right, poor girl,' said the man.

	Margaret felt shocked but also interested. 'Where do you live?' she asked.

	'9 Frances Street.'

	'And your name? I must not forget that.'

	'Nicholas Higgins. And she's called Bessy Higgins.'

	'I would like to come and see you,' said Margaret shyly.

	'I don't like strangers in my house,' said the man but, seeing Margaret's expression, added, 'You may come if you like.'

	As the couple turned to go their own way, the girl said, 'You won't forget to come and see us.'

	'She'll come, I can see it in her face,' said the father impatiently. 'Come on, Bess. The mill bell is ringing.'

	Margaret went home, thinking about her new friends, glad that she had found a human interest; from that day, Milton seemed a brighter place to her.





	CHAPTER FOUR

	New Friends

	The day after Margaret's meeting with Higgins and his daughter, Mr Hale nervously informed his wife and daughter that he had invited Mr Thornton to tea that night.

	'Mr Thornton! And tonight! What does the man want to come here for?' Mrs Hale said, with the expression of pain on her face that had recently become habitual.

	But since the invitation had been given, preparations had to be made, and Margaret spent the day ironing in the kitchen, while Dixon made cakes.

	When Mrs Hale saw her daughter's tired face, she was upset. 'If anyone had told me, when I was Miss Beresford, that a child of mine would have to work in the kitchen like a servant, preparing to entertain a tradesman - '

	'Oh, Mother!' said Margaret. 'I don't mind what kind of work I do, if it's for you and Father. And poor Mr Thornton can't help being a tradesman. With his education, I don't suppose he could do anything else.'

	In Mr Thornton's house a similar, yet different scene was taking place. A large-boned woman in her late sixties, with strong features and a severe expression, sat sewing in an expensively decorated dining-room. She was busy mending a long tablecloth when her son entered the room.

	'John, I thought you were going to tea with that friend of Mr Bell's.'

	'I am, Mother. I've come home to change my clothes.'

	'Change your clothes! Why should you put on your best clothes to have a cup of tea with an old clergyman?'

	'Mr Hale is a gentleman and his wife and daughter are ladies.'

	'You have never mentioned his family before.'

	'I have only met the daughter - and that was for half an hour.'

	'Don't let her try to catch you, John. You're a rich man.'

	Mr Thornton frowned. 'Mother, when I met her, she treated me as if she was a queen and I was her servant. You need not worry.' He left the room.

	'As if she was a queen and he was her servant!' Mrs Thornton thought aloud. 'Where could a woman find another man like John? He has the best heart I ever knew! I hate her!'

	Mr Thornton arrived at the Hales' house at exactly half-past seven. Mr Hale greeted him kindly and introduced him to his wife, whose pale face and tired manner suggested that she was not well. It was getting dark and Margaret was lighting the lamp as he entered. Looking around the sitting-room, the mill owner was impressed by its prettiness and style; somehow, it was much more comfortable and attractive than any of the rooms in his own large house.

	Margaret was serving the tea, and her movements were so graceful that at first he could not take his eyes off her. But soon he and Mr Hale began discussing a subject that interested them both - the relationship between the mill owners and the workers. Now it was Margaret's turn to watch Mr Thornton and notice how different he was to her father. While Mr Hale's expression was soft and dreamy, Mr Thornton's eyes seemed to want to enter the heart of everything he looked at. He rarely smiled, but when he did, it had the effect of sudden sunlight. Margaret liked Mr Thornton's smile; it was the first thing she had admired in her father's new friend.

	'I won't deny that I am proud of belonging to a manufacturing town,' said Mr Thornton to Mr Hale. 'I would rather be a working man here than a rich man in the south, living a dull, lazy life.'

	Hearing this, Margaret felt so angry that her face reddened. 'You do not know anything about the south. There is less trade there but there is also less suffering. I see men in the streets here who work so hard they look ill.'

	'And may I say you do not know the north?' said Mr Thornton gently, seeing that he had really hurt Margaret. But she did not answer and so he continued the conversation with Mr Hale.

	'At the beginning of this century the mill owners had almost unlimited power. We have much less power now. Now there are more factories, and more men are needed, so the relationship between the mill owners and the workers is more evenly balanced. One cannot say who will win the battle.'

	'Must you call it a battle between the two classes?' asked Mr Hale.

	'But it is a battle. Those who are successful work harder and behave more wisely than those who are not. And it is an unfortunate truth that lazy and foolish people will always oppose those who are successful.'

	'If I understand you correctly, you consider all those who are not successful in the world, for whatever reason, as your enemies, then,' said Margaret, in a clear, cold voice.

	'As their own enemies, certainly,' said Mr Thornton, quickly, hurt by the disapproval in her voice. But he felt that he should explain his meaning more clearly. He knew he could best illustrate what he wanted to say by telling them something about his own life. Feeling a little shy, so that his face went slightly red, he continued: 'I say this because of my own experiences. Sixteen years ago my father died in very miserable circumstances. I was taken from school and had to become a man in only a few days. Fortunately, I had a very strong and determined mother. We went to live in a small country town. There I found work in a clothes shop, and the money I earned, which was very little, had to support my mother, my sister and myself. My mother taught me to save a little money each week, and in this way I learnt self-control. Now that I can afford to look after her in the way she deserves, I thank her silently for teaching me this valuable lesson. I believe that unsuccessful people have not bothered to learn it, and so I feel contempt for them.'

	Margaret did not reply to this speech and soon Mr Thornton got up to leave. He shook hands with Mr and Mrs Hale, then went towards Margaret to shake hands with her too, as was the custom in Milton. But it was not the custom in the south and Margaret just bowed, although, as soon as she saw the hand half extended, then quickly withdrawn, she was sorry she had not been aware of his intention. Mr Thornton, however, did not realise this, and walked off angrily, telling himself that she was the proudest, most unpleasant girl he had ever met.

	'Margaret,' said Mr Hale, after Mr Thornton had left, 'I could not help watching your face when Mr Thornton confessed that he had been a shop boy. I was aware of it because Mr Bell had told me, but I half expected you to get up and leave the room.'

	'Oh Father, do you really think I am so silly? I liked the story of his childhood more than anything else he said. Everything else disgusted me - he was so hard! He didn't seem to realise that other people may not have received the training his mother gave him, or that it was his duty to help the less fortunate. But I did like the way he spoke about himself so simply, and with such love and respect for his mother.'

	'I heard a lot about his early life from Mr Bell before we came here,' said Mr Hale, 'and as he has told you part of it, I will tell you the rest. His father lost all his money and then killed himself. After his death, no one offered to help the family. Mr Bell said they had very little to eat for years. But when the young man had made enough money, he visited all the people whom his father owed money to and began to pay them back. It was done very quietly, but finally he paid all his father's debts. It helped him that Mr Bell, one of the people his father owed money to, invited him to work with him.'

	'That was a very fine thing for Mr Thornton to do,' said Margaret. 'It is such a pity, then, that wealth is the only thing that matters to him.'

	She was getting up to leave the room as she said this and, just as she was opening the door, she said, 'Father, I do think that Mr Thornton is a very unusual man. But I don't like him at all.

	'And I do,' said her father, laughing, 'although I don't see him as a hero or anything like that. But goodnight, child. Your mother looks very tired tonight.'

	Margaret had noticed her mother's unhealthy appearance in recent weeks and it had made her anxious. Realising from her father's remark that he had noticed it too, she felt even more fearful. There were good reasons to worry about her mother's health. Their life in Milton was so different from the way they had lived in Helstone, where they had spent much of their time outside, in the fresh country air. In Milton the air was heavy with factory smoke and Mrs Hale did not like going out much. And then there were the financial worries and the difficulty in finding a servant. There were other signs that something was wrong. Margaret sometimes heard her mother and Dixon talking in low voices in the bedroom; Dixon would come out crying, which was the way she behaved when Mrs Hale was very upset about something. Margaret suspected that her mother had some secret about her health that she was not telling her.

	That night, she lay awake for hours, planning ways in which she could help. If she could find a servant to help Dixon with her duties, then Dixon could give her mother the attention she had been accustomed to all her life.

	Margaret spent the next few days looking for a servant, but without success. One afternoon she met Bessy Higgins in the street and stopped to talk to her.

	'Bessy, how are you? Better, I hope, now that it's warmer.'

	'Better and not better, if you see what I mean.'

	'Not exactly,' said Margaret, smiling.

	'I'm not coughing, so I'm better in that way. But I'm tired of Milton and I want to go to a better place.'

	For a minute or two Margaret did not speak, then she said in a low voice, 'Bessy, do you really wish to die?'

	Bessy replied, 'If you'd lived the life I've lived, and been as sick as I have, then you'd be glad enough when the doctor said he feared you'd never see another winter.'

	'Why, Bessy? What kind of a life have you had?'

	'If you'd come to my house when you said you would, I could maybe have told you.'

	'I have been very busy,' said Margaret quietly. 'But may I go home with you now?'

	Seeing from Margaret's soft, friendly expression that she was sincere, Bessy said, 'You may come if you want.'

	They walked together in silence until they reached a narrow, dirty street. When they entered the house, Margaret saw that a girl, younger than Bessy but taller, was washing clothes in a rough, capable way, making a lot of noise as she did so. Bessy sat down, breathless and exhausted, and closed her eyes. Margaret asked the sister, who was called Mary, to fetch a glass of water, and Bessy drank it and felt better. She asked Margaret where she had lived before Milton, and Margaret described Helstone to her, doing her best to describe its beauty.

	'I used to think once that if I could have a day of doing nothing - a day in some quiet place like the one you described - I would feel better,' Bessy said. 'But now I've had so many days of doing nothing, and I'm just as tired as when I was at work. I was well until mother died, but soon after that I got sick. It was when I began to work in a part of the factory where the air was filled with white dust from the cotton. They say the dust gets into your lungs, and you start coughing blood.'

	'But can't they do something about it?' asked Margaret, shocked.

	'There's a great wheel they can use to blow away the dust, but it costs a lot of money. They didn't have one at our factory.'

	'How old are you?' asked Margaret.

	'Nineteen in July.'

	'And I too am nineteen.' Thinking of the contrast between them, Margaret could not speak for a moment. Then, seeing that Bessy was becoming even more tired, she said, 'I must go. I will come again as soon as I can. But if I don't come for a week or two, don't think I've forgotten you. I may be busy.'

	'I know you'll come again. But remember - in a week or two, I may be dead and buried.'

	'I'll come as soon as I can,' said Margaret, holding Bessy's hand in hers for a moment.

	From that day, Mrs Hale seemed to become more and more unwell. It was about ten months now since Edith's marriage and, looking back, Margaret saw so many difficulties; but there had been moments of real pleasure, and it was a comfort to her that she and her mother were becoming closer at last.

	One evening, when Mr Hale was away, Mrs Hale began to talk about Frederick. She explained that he had taken the name of Dickinson so that he would not be recognised. She told Margaret to go to her desk and open a drawer, where she would find his letters. Margaret carried the yellow, sea-stained letters to her mother, who untied the string that held them together with trembling fingers. She gave them to Margaret to read, and at the same time told her the story of the mutiny, as she had learnt it from Frederick.

	Captain Reid, the captain of the Russell, Frederick's ship, had been a cruel man who treated his men so badly that one of them had died. The men had mutinied and put Captain Reid off the Russell, sending him out in a boat with some of his officers; the boat had been found some days later by a West Indian ship. Frederick, who was one of the most senior officers, had been among those who had mutinied. Reporting the incident, the English newspapers had named him as one of those responsible for the mutiny, and said that he ought to be hung by the neck.

	'He fought injustice and I am proud of him,' said Mrs Hale in a weak voice. 'But I wish I could see him once more.'

	'It is seven years ago - would they still hang him, Mother?'

	'Some of the sailors who mutinied were captured and tried in court. They were hanged. And the worst thing was that the court said that their superior officers had encouraged them to mutiny.'

	The two women were silent for a long time.

	'And Frederick was in South America for several years?'

	'Yes. And now he is in Spain, somewhere near Cadiz. If he comes to England he will be hanged. I shall never see his face again.'

	Mrs Hale turned her face to the wall and lay very still; nothing could be said to comfort her. When her father came in, Margaret left the room, seeing no promise of brightness anywhere.





	CHAPTER FIVE

	A Strike Begins

	Four or five days after his visit to the Hales, Mr Thornton decided that his mother and sister should also visit them, but he had some difficulty persuading them to do so. Mrs Thornton did not often go out visiting and she did not understand why she should become friends with a teacher. Eventually she agreed, but it was then Fanny's turn to protest.

	'I am not coming,' she said. 'I have a headache today.'

	'Fanny! I wish you to go,' said her brother authoritatively. 'Please go without me saying any more about it.'

	Mrs Thornton sighed. Unlike her mother and her brother Fanny was not a strong character, and Mrs Thornton had an unconscious contempt for those who were weak. She behaved lovingly towards her daughter and a stranger might have thought that she loved her more than her son. The opposite was true. The honesty with which mother and son spoke to each other showed the great respect they had for each other's strength. Mrs Thornton thanked God for her son every day of her life.

	That afternoon, Mrs Thornton and Fanny set out in their carriage for Crampton. When she entered the Hales' little sitting-room, Mrs Thornton, who was shy and hated meeting strangers, hid her shyness by looking even more severe than usual. She and Mrs Hale started a conversation about servants while Margaret, who was sewing, tried hard to talk to Fanny.

	'I see no piano, so I suppose you are not musical,' said Fanny.

	'I am fond of good music but I cannot play well myself. We sold our old piano when we came here.'

	'How can you exist without one? A piano is a necessity!'

	'You have good concerts here, I believe,' said Margaret coldly.

	'Oh yes! One is sure to hear the newest music here.'

	'Do you like new music, then?'

	'Oh, one knows it is the fashion in London. You have been to London, of course.'

	'Yes,' said Margaret. 'I lived there for several years. Have you never been there? It is an easy journey by train.'

	'I would love to go, but mother does not wish to. She is very proud of Milton, you see. To me it is a dirty, smoky place, but I believe she admires it for those qualities.'

	'If it has been Mrs Thornton's home for some years, I can understand her loving it,' said Margaret in her clear voice.

	'May I ask what you are saying about me, Miss Hale?' asked Mrs Thornton.

	Fanny replied, 'Oh Mother, we are trying to understand why you are so fond of Milton.'

	'Thank you,' said Mrs Thornton, I do not feel that my natural liking for the place where I was born requires an explanation.'

	Margaret was cross that Fanny had made it seem that they had been criticising her mother; she also disliked the way Mrs Thornton had spoken to her.

	After a pause, Mrs Thornton said, 'Do you know anything about Milton, Miss Hale? Have you visited our splendid factories?'

	'No,' said Margaret honestly. 'I don't think I would greatly enjoy visiting such places.'

	'No doubt,' said Mrs Thornton, sounding displeased. 'I thought that as newcomers to a manufacturing town, you might have been interested in finding out more about its business.'

	Soon after this, the visit ended. 'Fanny,' said her mother as they drove away, 'we will be polite to these Hales, but don't become friendly with the daughter. She will do you no good. The mother looks very ill and seems a nice, quiet kind of person. Well, I suppose John will be satisfied now.'

	The next day, Mr Hale and Margaret returned Mrs Thornton's visit. To their surprise, they discovered that the Thorntons lived next to their mill in Marlborough Street. Behind a long wall there was a large yard, with offices on one side and the mill on the other. At the end of the yard was a tall, attractive house. They knocked at the door and were taken upstairs to a large sitting-room. Mrs Thornton entered a few minutes later.

	'How is Mr Thornton?' asked Mr Hale. 'He was unable to come for his lesson yesterday and I was afraid he was not well.'

	'My son is rarely ill. He told me he was too busy to visit you last night. But I know he values the hours he spends with you.'

	'I find them equally pleasant,' said Mr Hale. 'He has such an appreciation of Ancient Greek literature.'

	'I have no doubt that to know Ancient Greek is desirable for those who do not work. But I advised my son not to study it. His work requires all his attention. It ought to be enough for him to have one great desire and to aim only at that.'

	'And that is - ?' asked Mr Hale.

	Mrs Thornton blushed as she answered, 'To have a high position among the manufacturers in this country. My son has earned this place for himself. All over Europe, the name of John Thornton of Milton is respected among businessmen.'

	Both Mr Hale and Margaret felt uncomfortably aware that they had never heard of this great name until Mr Bell had told them about him. The expression on Margaret's face revealed this to the sensitive Mrs Thornton.

	'You are thinking you have never heard of this wonderful son of mine, Miss Hale.'

	'Yes, it is true. But since I have been here I have heard enough to make me respect and admire him.'

	Mrs Thornton smiled, but said, 'Thank you, Miss Hale. Many young women would not have said that, fearing that it would seem that they had plans to win my son's heart.'

	On hearing this, Margaret laughed, but stopped when she saw Mrs Thornton's annoyed look.

	'I'm sorry, madam. But I really am not interested in that way,' she said.

	'Young ladies have been, before now,' said Mrs Thornton stiffly.

	'I hope I will see Mr Thornton on Thursday,' said Mr Hale, trying to change the subject.

	'I cannot say. There will almost certainly be a strike.'

	'A strike! Why?' asked Margaret.

	'The workers want higher wages, I suppose,' said Mr Hale.

	'That is what they say, but the truth is, they want to be more powerful than the mill owners. They strike every five or six years. But I believe that if the men do strike, the mill owners have some ideas that will teach them not do it again in a hurry.'

	That evening Mr Thornton came to see Mr Hale. He was shown into the sitting-room, where Margaret was reading aloud to her father and mother.

	'I have come partly to bring a note from my mother and partly to apologise for not coming for my lesson yesterday. The note contains the address you asked for.'

	'Thank you,' said Margaret quickly, holding out her hand to take the note. She did not want her mother to know that her father, who was becoming worried about his wife's health, had asked Mr Thornton to give them the name of a good doctor. Mr Thornton seemed to understand immediately and gave her the note without another word of explanation.

	Mr Hale began to talk about the strike. Mr Thornton, looking angry, said, 'Yes, the fools are going to strike. They think the cotton trade is as good as it was last year. They want better pay, but because we won't explain why we have refused their demand, and tell them we may have to lower wages, they think we are trying to cheat them.'

	'But why can't you explain your reasons?' asked Margaret.

	'Do you give your servants reasons for the way in which you spend your money? We manufacturers have a right to choose what we do with it.'

	'What about the rights of the workers?' said Margaret quietly.

	'I'm sorry, I did not hear what you said.'

	'I would rather not repeat it,' she said. 'I don't think you will understand.'

	'Please try and explain,' said Mr Thornton, who really wanted to know what she had said.

	'I meant that the workers have rights too. Surely they deserve to know why you cannot pay them more.'

	Mr Thornton paused for a moment and then said, 'In my opinion, the workers are like children. I do not think we mill owners try to keep them like that - it is just the way they are. They need to be told what to do and, like children, they do not need to be given reasons why.'

	Margaret replied, 'I very much disagree with you. There should be friendship and cooperation between the manufacturers and their workers. We all depend on each other.'

	The conversation continued with neither side willing to change their position. Mr Thornton got up to go. Margaret smiled at him but did not put out her hand, and again, as he left, he told himself that she was unpleasantly proud.

	That night, as the Thorntons sat in their sitting-room, Mrs Thornton asked her son what he had done that day. On hearing that he had visited the Hales, Fanny said, 'Are they really so different to most people one meets?'

	Her words annoyed her brother, but he did not reply.

	'They do not seem unusual to me,' said Mrs Thornton.

	'He appears a good kind of man - not clever enough to be in trade. The wife sees herself as a lady. The girl is the one who puzzles me. She seems to have great self-importance and I can't understand why. They're not rich and, from what I understand, they never have been.'

	'And she can't even play the piano, Mother,' said Fanny.

	'Go on, Fanny. What else does she need to bring her up to your standard?' said Mr Thornton, who was walking up and down the sitting-room. Then he stopped and said bravely, 'Mother, I want you to like Miss Hale.'

	'Why?' she asked, surprised. 'You're not thinking of marrying her - a girl without any money?'

	'She would never have me,' he answered with a short laugh.

	'From what she told me, I don't think she would,' said his mother. 'Her opinion of herself is far too high to think of you!'

	If these words hurt her son, the fading evening light hid the expression on his face, and in a minute he said cheerfully, 'Well, I'm sure of that too, and have no intention of asking her to be my wife. But I see trouble for that girl - her mother is very ill - and I would like you to be a friend to her, in case she needs one.'

	'I cannot forgive her pride,' said his mother, 'but because you ask me, John, I will be her friend, if she needs it.'

	'I am so tired of this subject,' said Fanny.

	'Well,' said her brother rather bitterly, 'shall we talk about the strike then? The men at Hamper's mill are going to strike tomorrow. Mine will strike next week.'

	'You are going to have difficulty completing your business orders,' said Mrs Thornton, looking worried. 'Can you get workers from Ireland?'

	'Yes, I can, and I will if the strike goes on too long. But it will make our workers very angry.'

	He continued walking up and down the room, not speaking but taking deep breaths from time to time. Fanny started chatting to her mother and at ten o'clock the family said good night. Mr Thornton remained in the room, anxiously considering his position. Because of the strike, all his business plans were in confusion; the workers seemed to him to be completely mad.

	'I can give them a fortnight - no more. If they haven't understood the situation by then, I'll be forced to get workers from Ireland,' he thought.

	In the second week of the strike, Margaret went to visit Bessy. When she arrived, Nicholas Higgins and his daughter were sitting by the fire. Nicholas, who was smoking a pipe, stood up, pushing his chair towards Margaret. She sat down and enquired about Bessy's health.

	'She's upset about the strike. She doesn't like it.'

	'This is the third strike I've seen,' said Bessy, sighing.

	'We'll win this time, you can be sure of that,' said Nicholas.

	'Why are you striking?' asked Margaret.

	'There are five or six mill owners who want to pay us less than we get now,' replied Nicholas. 'And we won't agree. We'll die first. But don't think I'm striking just for myself. There are only three in my family, but John Boucher next door has a sick wife and six children. He can't manage with the wages he has now from the mill - how is he going to live on less?'

	'Perhaps you should ask the mill owners why they want to pay less. The reason may be that business is not good.'

	'I don't believe that,' said Nicholas angrily. 'The mill owners will say anything. They use us so that they can get rich. But this time they'll have to give in. They've got a lot of business orders and they need us to do the work.'

	Bessy sighed heavily when she heard this and Margaret said, 'You don't like all this struggling and fighting, do you?'

	'No,' said Bessy, 'I'm tired of it all - all this shouting and talk of work and wages. Oh! The tobacco smoke makes me feel ill!'

	'Then I'll never smoke in the house again,' said her father gently. 'But why didn't you tell me before?'

	Receiving no answer, he went outside to finish his pipe, and Bessy said in a low voice, 'He needs his pipe. It's one of the few comforts he has - his work is so hard and boring. And when a strike begins, everyone's so hopeful at first. And then it goes on and on and people get angry and depressed.'

	'Maybe you're exaggerating because you're not well,' said Margaret.

	'No, I'm not exaggerating. People have been coming to see us and they all say how much they hate the mill owners. I've seen women crying because they have no money to buy food and their children are so hungry they can't sleep at night.'

	'You're looking more and more feverish, Bessy. And your hand is so hot!' Margaret found some water, wet her handkerchief and laid it on Bessy's forehead. 'I must go,' she said, 'but I'll come back soon.'

	'You're not like anyone I've ever known. I don't know what to think of you.'

	'I don't know what to think of myself. Goodbye.'

	Bessy watched her as she walked out of the house. 'I wonder if there are many people like her, down south. She's so strong and bright! But will she stay like that, I wonder?'



	Chapter six

	The Shadow of Death

	Dr Donaldson, the doctor recommended by Mr Thornton, came to call on Mrs Hale soon after Margaret's visit to Bessy. Margaret was not allowed into the room while he was there, but Dixon was, and this made her feel very jealous.

	She waited anxiously outside, and when the doctor came out, she said quickly, 'My father is out. Would you come downstairs?'

	Dr Donaldson followed her into Mr Hale's study.

	'What is the matter with Mother?' Margaret asked.

	The doctor hesitated and she said, 'If the news is bad, my father must be told the news gently. Only I can do this.'

	'My dear, your mother said that you must not be told.'

	'I feel sure that you have not promised to keep the secret.'

	'Well,' said the doctor, smiling sadly, 'you are right. I did not promise. In fact, I'm afraid you will all know soon enough.'

	Margaret went very white, but no part of her face moved. Dr Donaldson was a man who understood people well and he saw immediately that she was strong enough to be told the truth. He spoke two sentences in a low voice, watching her all the time.

	Her eyes grew wide and she went even whiter. Then she said, 'I have been afraid of this for many weeks.' She began to cry, but a few moments later, the tears stopped. 'Will my mother suffer much?' she asked.

	He shook his head. 'I can't say. But the latest discoveries of medical science can help a lot.'

	'My father!' she said, trembling all over. 'He must not be told the truth yet - not all at once. It would kill him!'

	'I do not know Mr Hale, so it is difficult to give advice. But I will visit often and your father will be a little more prepared for the truth. And when I come again, it will be as a friend.'

	Margaret was crying so much that she could not speak, but she shook the doctor's hand as he left.

	'That's a fine girl,' thought Dr Donaldson, as he sat in his carriage. 'What a queen she is! The way she threw her head back, forcing me to tell her the truth. If I were thirty years younger, I would have fallen in love with her.'

	Meanwhile Margaret sat in her father's study, trying to find some strength. After some minutes she ran upstairs. Her mother was lying in an armchair, looking quite peaceful.

	'Margaret, how strange you look! What is the matter?' Suddenly guessing the truth, Mrs Hale said, 'Dr Donaldson hasn't been talking to you, has he, child?'

	'Oh yes, Mother, he did. I made him.' Margaret knelt by her mother's side and started to cry and kiss her hand. 'Oh Mother, let me be your nurse. It will be such a comfort to me.'

	'My poor child! Dixon and I thought you should not know.'

	'Dixon thought!' said Margaret scornfully. 'I am your daughter, Mother! I only want to be near you. In Harley Street, I used to cry in bed at night, thinking you would forget me.'

	'And I used to wonder, what will Margaret think of our little cottage after her luxurious life with Aunt Shaw?'

	'Oh Mother, how can you say that? I loved Helstone so much!'

	'I shall never see Helstone again. But Margaret - Frederick!' Mrs Hale started sobbing. 'Frederick, Frederick, come to me! I am dying, come to me!'

	Dixon came running in, and they lifted Mrs Hale into her bed. Margaret sat with her until she fell asleep, then the two women went into the sitting-room to talk.

	'Look what you've done to your mother - and now I suppose you'll tell your father,' Dixon said angrily.

	'No, Dixon,' said Margaret sorrowfully, 'I won't tell him. He would be too upset.' And she burst into tears.

	'Miss Margaret, my dear, I've had to keep this secret for so long and your mother's the person I love most in the world.'

	'Oh, Dixon!' said Margaret. 'I've been cross with you so often, not realising what a terrible burden you were carrying!'

	'You dear child! Now you go out for a long walk and you'll feel better. I'll look after your mother.'

	'I will.' Margaret gave Dixon a kiss and left the room.

	Dixon watched her as she walked down the street. 'She's as sweet as a nut, that girl. There are three people I love - her mother, Frederick and her. Her father's always been too busy thinking and reading to look after my lady properly. And look what's happened to him! Poor child! Her clothes look old. In Helstone she didn't need to mend her socks or clean her gloves. And now - !'

	When Mr Hale came home several hours later, he enquired anxiously about Dr Donaldson's visit. Margaret told him that the doctor did not think her mother was seriously ill at present but that he felt she needed care; he had given her some medicine and would visit frequently. Mr Hale's nervous reaction showed that he realised that his wife might be in danger. All that evening he kept going into his wife's bedroom to see if she was still asleep. Finally he came back looking comforted.

	'She's awake now, Margaret. She has asked for a cup of tea.'

	During the next week, Mrs Hale's health improved and the family began to hope that she would recover. But in the streets outside there was an atmosphere of gloom and discontent. Mr Hale knew several workers and was depressed by their stories of hunger and suffering. When Mr Thornton next came to visit, Mr Hale told him these stories. The mill owner explained that in business, profits depended to some extent on the country's economy. When times were difficult, some manufacturers would lose their businesses and their workers would lose their jobs as a result. He spoke without emotion, seeming to feel that neither the employer nor the workers had a right to complain.

	Mr Thornton's coldness shocked Margaret. How could he talk as if trade was the only thing that mattered? When he had arrived that afternoon, he had offered to help her mother in any way he could. Margaret could not understand how those eyes, which were so kind when he talked about her mother, could belong to the same man who spoke about his workers so pitilessly.

	Later that week Margaret visited Bessy, who seemed even more exhausted than usual. The girl told her a sad story about the Boucher family next door. John Boucher, one of the strikers, had suddenly died three days ago. But this was not all. Mrs Boucher was becoming more and more unwell and the youngest child was so weak with hunger that he was likely to die. The story shocked Margaret and she immediately took out her purse and pressed the money in it into Bessy's hand. When she returned home, she told her parents about the family, and the next day a big basket of food was sent to them.

	That evening, Margaret and her father went for a long walk and, as they returned home, began to discuss Mr Thornton.

	'He must know how much his workers hate him,' said Margaret. 'They think he has no feelings.'

	'I disagree. In my opinion, he is a passionate man but is too proud to show his emotions.'

	'I am not sure. But he is very clever and has great strength of character, and I am starting to like him a little.'

	By now they were at their front door. Dixon opened it and when they saw her face they both started to tremble.

	'Thank God you've come! Or Donaldson is here. She's better now, but I thought she was going to die an hour ago!'

	Mr Hale took Margaret's arm to prevent himself from falling.

	'Oh, I should not have left her!' cried Margaret.

	Dr Donaldson met them inside. 'She is better for the moment,' he whispered.

	'For the moment! Let me go to her!' cried Mr Hale.

	They entered the bedroom. Mrs Hale lay on the bed, and from the look on her face it was clear to them all that death was near. Mr Hale began to shake and Dr Donaldson took him downstairs and helped him into a chair.

	After some moments, Mr Hale said, making a great effort, 'Margaret, did you know about this? It was cruel of you.'

	'I told her not to tell you,' said Dr Donaldson. 'Your wife will sleep well tonight and will be better tomorrow, I hope.'

	'But what about the illness? Please tell me the truth.'

	'We cannot stop it, only delay it.' Dr Donaldson explained that they need not fear that Mrs Hale would die immediately, but that she would not recover. He left, promising to return early in the morning.

	Both Mr Hale and Dixon did not sleep for many hours. Margaret felt as if she would never sleep again. To the young woman watching by her mother's bed, her life until that moment seemed unreal. Life seemed so shadowy, and passed so quickly! When the morning came, cold and grey, it seemed as if the terrible night was also a dream; it too was past.

	When Mrs Hale woke the next morning, she was unaware of how ill she had been, and was rather surprised by Dr Donaldson's early visit and by the anxious faces of her husband and child. The doctor allowed her to return to the sitting-room, but she was uncomfortable in every position and that night she became very feverish. The doctor thought that a water-bed might help and suggested that the family could borrow one from the Thorntons', since he knew they had one.

	'I could go and ask them to lend it to us while mother is asleep,' said Margaret.

	That afternoon Mrs Hale seemed much better, and Margaret left the house and set off for the Thorntons'.



	Chapter seven

	Dangerous Times

	It was about two miles from Crampton to Marlborough Street. Margaret, who was absorbed in her own thoughts, did not notice anything unusual for the first mile and a half of her journey. But then she realised that there were even more people than usual on the crowded roads and that they were not moving forward but were talking excitedly.

	It was only when she arrived in Marlborough Street that she realised that there was an atmosphere of real anger in the crowd and that in the distance the low roar of hundreds of voices could be heard. Margaret noticed all this but did not understand its meaning. There was only one thought in her mind; her mother was going to die.

	When she arrived at the house, the man who guarded the wall's tall wooden gates would only open them a little way, but when he recognised her, he let her in and quickly locked the gates behind her.

	Margaret walked up to the door of the house and was shown into the sitting-room. Unusually, there was no sound of machinery from the factory, but the shouts of the crowds were growing louder.

	Fanny entered and said, 'Mother will be here soon. My brother has brought in workers from Ireland and the Milton people are very angry. For their own safety, the Irish workers are in the top room of the mill.'

	Mrs Thornton came in, looking thunderous, and Margaret realised she had arrived at a bad time; nevertheless, she explained her mother's situation and made her request. Mrs Thornton, who was listening to the shouts of the crowd outside, did not reply. Then she jumped up and exclaimed, 'They're at the gates! Call John, Fanny! They'll break the gates down!'

	The women and the servants ran to the windows to look out. The wooden gates were shaking as men threw themselves against them. Fanny screamed, while Mrs Thornton's face was white with fear. Mr Thornton appeared; his face was a little red but he did not look at all frightened.

	'You have come at an unfortunate moment, Miss Hale,' he said. 'Mother, you and the servants will be safer upstairs.'

	The servants ran upstairs, but Mrs Thornton said, 'I will stay with you, of course. When will the soldiers arrive?'

	'In about twenty minutes,' said her son calmly.

	'Twenty minutes!' cried Mrs Thornton, looking very frightened.

	Mr Thornton went to the windows to close them, and as he did so they heard the sound of the gates breaking open. Fanny fainted and her mother ran to her and carried her upstairs.

	'Should you not go upstairs too, Miss Hale?' said Mr Thornton.

	'No,' said Margaret, but now the workers had arrived at the house and were shouting so loudly that he could not hear her.

	'Let them shout!' said Mr Thornton coolly. 'The soldiers will be here soon. Be brave, Miss Hale.'

	'Don't be afraid for me. But please don't let the soldiers cut down those poor men,' said Margaret passionately. 'They are human beings. Go out and speak to them, man to man!'

	A dark cloud came over Mr Thornton's face when she said this, and he was silent. Then, 'I will go,' he said.

	He left the room. Margaret ran to the window and soon saw that he was standing on the steps to the house with his arms folded. As she watched, she saw some of the younger men in the crowd take off their shoes to throw at him.

	She ran downstairs and opened the door. Placing herself in front of Mr Thornton, she cried, 'Do not use violence! The soldiers are coming - go before it is too late!'

	Mr Thornton moved to one side, so that he could be seen.

	'Send the Irish workers away!' shouted an angry voice.

	'No!' exclaimed Mr Thornton, and the crowd started shouting insults. Margaret saw that the group of younger men were aiming their shoes at him. Desperately trying to save him, she stood in front of him and threw her arms around him.

	'Go away!' he said, and shook her off.

	At that moment, a shoe almost hit them. A second later, a stone hit Margaret hard on the forehead and she fell onto Mr Thornton's shoulder. He put his arms around her.

	'How brave you are!' he said scornfully to the crowds. 'Hundreds of you attacking one woman.'

	The crowd went silent. Then, slowly, people started moving towards the gates. Only one voice cried, 'The stone was meant for you, but you were hiding behind a woman!'

	Shaking with anger, Mr Thornton placed Margaret gently on the steps and walked right into the middle of the crowd.

	'Kill me, if that is what you want,' he said, but the crowd continued moving towards the gates.

	When he was sure they would not turn back, Mr Thornton ran back up the steps to Margaret.

	'I'm all right,' she said, and fainted.

	He picked her up and carried her, still unconscious, into the dining-room. There, he laid her on the sofa and cried passionately, 'Oh, Margaret! No one knows what you mean to me! You are the only woman I have ever loved!'

	His mother appeared; fortunately, she did not seem to have heard his words. He told her what had happened and asked her to look after Margaret while he went to talk to the Irish workers. A servant called Jane came and started to bathe Margaret's face. Margaret opened her eyes but after some moments closed them again.

	'We must fetch a doctor,' said Mrs Thornton, but she could not persuade either Fanny or the servants to go. Finally, she said angrily, 'I will go myself,' and left the room.

	Jane, who had seen everything from an upstairs window, told Fanny what had happened.

	'She had her arms around Mr Thornton's neck,' said Jane.

	'I don't believe it,' said Fanny. 'I know she cares for my brother - anyone can see that. And I'm sure she would love it if he married her - which he never will! But I don't believe she would actually throw her arms around him!'

	'Well, she did,' replied Jane.

	As she spoke, Margaret's eyes opened and tears started pouring down her face. Mrs Thornton came in, accompanied by a doctor.

	'How is she? Are you better, my dear?' she asked.

	Margaret gazed dreamily at her. The doctor examined her and then put a small bandage on her forehead. She sat up slowly and said, 'I am better now. I must go home. The bandage is under my hair, so Mother will not see it.'

	'You are not well enough to go home,' said Mrs Thornton.

	'I must,' said Margaret. 'May I ask for a carriage, please?'

	They could not persuade her to stay, and as the doctor did not think that her injuries were serious, it was agreed that she could go but that the doctor would accompany her home.

	Five minutes after Margaret left, Mr Thornton came in. 'Where is Miss Hale?' he asked anxiously.

	'Gone home,' said his mother. 'She was a lot better.'

	'She could not have been well enough.'

	'She said she was, and the doctor said she was. She went home in a carriage. Let us talk of something else. She has caused enough disturbance.'

	'I don't know what would have happened to me without her. '

	'Do you really need a girl to defend you?' asked Mrs Thornton scornfully.

	His face turned red. 'Not many girls would have done what she did.'

	'A girl in love will do almost anything,' replied his mother, watching him carefully.

	'Mother!' He stepped forward, breathing heavily.

	Feeling uncomfortable, Mrs Thornton changed the subject. 'You don't think there will be any more violence, do you?'

	'The soldiers will make sure there isn't. I'm going to arrange to have a guard around the house and mill.'

	He left to do this and returned some hours later, explaining that he had arranged for the leaders of the strike to be arrested. Then he said, 'Mother, I am going to Crampton tomorrow to see Miss Hale.'

	'The servant who is taking the water-bed can ask how she is.'

	'I want to thank her myself for what she did. But there is another reason why I am going.'

	Mrs Thornton knew immediately what he was going to say. 'You feel that because she allowed her feelings about you to overcome her that you must ask her to marry you?'

	'I dare not hope she will accept. I cannot believe such a creature cares for me.'

	'Don't be foolish, John. You talk as if she were a princess! She has shown her real feelings at last. I admit, I like her more now.'

	'Dearest Mother! I feel sure she does not care for me - but I have to ask her.'

	They wished each other goodnight and she kissed him, then went upstairs to her bedroom. There she locked the door and burst into tears, unable to bear the idea of losing him.

	When Margaret returned home, her father and mother were talking in low voices together, looking very pale.

	'Mrs Thornton will send the water-bed, Mother,' said Margaret, still feeling as if she might faint.

	'Dear, how tired you look! Is it very hot outside?'

	'Yes, and the strikers are very noisy.'

	She prepared the tea with trembling hands and was glad that her parents did not notice. It was only when she was alone in her bedroom that she was able to think about the day's events. She sat in her chair and put her hands round her knees.

	'I, who despise people who lack self-control, threw my arms around Mr Thornton like a romantic fool! Did I do any good? The crowd would probably have gone away without me.'

	This was her first judgement, but when she thought about it more coolly she decided that her actions had probably helped the situation. 'But what made me defend him as if he were a helpless child? I'm not surprised Fanny thought I was in love with him - me, in love with Mr Thornton!' Her pale cheeks became bright red and she started to cry.

	'How terrible that they think that about me when I don't care about him at all! But it wasn't fair, one man against so many. I had to help him. I would do the same again if it was necessary.'

	Having decided this, she lay down in her bed, too tired to move even one finger. She did not know if she slept that night; in her thoughts, her dreams, people were watching her and discussing her and she was filled with shame.

	The next morning was a beautiful day and Margaret decided that she would try to forget all about what had happened. She was doing some sewing in her room when Dixon came to tell her that Mr Thornton had called and wanted to see her.

	'I will come,' said Margaret quietly, but it was some minutes before she found the courage to meet him.

	Mr Thornton was standing by the sitting-room window, his heart beating fast. When he thought of the touch of Margaret's arms around his neck, he felt as if he were on fire. He was afraid he would lose all self-control, that he would hold out his arms to her and beg her to come into them. He feared that she would reject him, but he could not imagine a future without her.

	She came in, looking pale and tired but very beautiful. Mr Thornton went to the door and shut it. He said, 'Miss Hale, I am so very grateful to you for - '

	'You had nothing to be grateful for,' said Margaret quickly. 'It was a natural reaction. Any woman would have done the same.'

	'I disagree. I owe my life to you. Oh, Miss Hale, I owe everything to you - to the woman I love as I have never loved a woman before.'

	He took her hand and held it tight, but she said icily, 'The way you speak shocks me. You seem to think that what I did was because of my feelings for you. You are wrong. I would have done the same for any man in that crowd.'

	'Am I not allowed to thank you, or express my feelings?' said Mr Thornton.

	'Not in the way you have done.'

	'I understand now. It is clear you despise me. I think you do not understand me.'

	'I do not wish to understand you.'

	'No, I see that you do not.'

	Despite his angry words, all Mr Thornton wanted to do was to throw himself at Margaret's feet. She started to cry. He waited, hoping for a reply, but when she remained silent, he picked up his hat to leave.

	'You seem insulted by my feelings, but I cannot help it. Until now, I have never loved any woman. I have been too busy. You cannot stop me from loving you, but do not be afraid that I will annoy you by talking about my feelings.'

	'I am not afraid,' said Margaret, standing very straight. 'But Mr Thornton, you have been very kind to my father. Please, let us not be angry with each other. Please.'

	Her whole manner softened when she said these words, but Mr Thornton did not answer. He refused the hand that she held out, then turned and left the room. Margaret thought she saw tears in his eyes and she felt sorry that she had hurt him. 'But how could I help it?' she asked herself. 'I never liked him. I was polite, but nothing more. This is his fault, not mine.'

	When Mr Thornton left the house that morning, he had a violent headache and wanted to sit down and cry, like a little child. A bus stopped and without thinking he got onto it; it took him to a small country town. He went into the fields and walked aimlessly, recalling everything Margaret had said and done that morning. Then he thought about every time he had met her, and the way she had looked and acted. He became more and more certain that there never was and never would be anyone like her. He knew that she did not love him and never would, but he also knew that nothing could stop him from loving her.

	He returned to the mill late in the afternoon and spent the rest of the day working; due to the events of the previous day, he had many arrangements to make. It was dark when he returned home, but his mother was waiting for him. She did not want to appear anxious, and when she heard him at the door she pretended to be absorbed in a book.

	He came in and at first she did not look up. Then she said, 'Well, John?'

	He kissed her on the forehead, and said in a low voice, 'No one loves me - no one cares for me except you, Mother.'

	Tears came to his eyes and he turned away and leaned against the wall. She stood up and almost fell. Then, putting her hands on his shoulders, she looked into his eyes and said, 'A mother's love is forever. A girl's love changes with every wind. She would not have you, would she, John?'

	'I am not good enough for her, mother. I knew I was not. But I love her more than ever.'

	'And I hate her for what she has done to you,' said Mrs Thornton fiercely.

	'That is unfair. But let us never talk about her again.'

	'With all my heart.'

	Chapter eight

	 Time of Change

	Margaret was so surprised by Mr Thornton's declaration of love that she remained standing in the middle of the sitting-room for some time after he had gone. She could not help comparing Mr Thornton with Mr Lennox and thinking how different they were. Henry Lennox seemed to have slipped over the boundary between friendship and love for a moment, and to have regretted it almost immediately. With Mr Thornton, on the other hand, there had been no friendship; they had done nothing except argue with one another. And now he had come in this strange, wild way to tell her that he loved her and would always love her! Margaret was horrified by this declaration, but she could not stop thinking about him and the look in his deep, strangely passionate eyes.

	Not wanting to be alone, she went upstairs to see her mother, who was resting in her room. Mrs Hale spent five minutes praising the water-bed, which she said was very comfortable, and then turned the conversation to the subject closest to her heart.

	'Margaret,' she said, sitting up very straight on her sofa, 'if I am going to die soon, I must see Frederick first. I beg you to bring him to me. If he came for five minutes only, it would not be dangerous! Oh, let me see him before I die!'

	Margaret felt that her mother's desire to see Frederick was so natural that she should do everything she could to bring him to her, even though it might be dangerous for Frederick.

	'I will write to him tonight. I am sure he will come.'

	'You must write this afternoon. The post goes at five. I have so little time left; if we miss one post, it may be too late.'

	'But I need to talk to Father and he is out.'

	'Do you think he will deny my last wish? I would not be dying if he had not brought me to this smoky, sunless place.'

	'Oh, Mother!' said Margaret sadly.

	'It is true - he has said so himself. He would do anything for me. Don't lose time, dear Margaret. Write now!'

	Margaret sat down to write the letter. She took it to the post office and was walking back home when she met her father.

	When he heard what she had done, he looked very worried.

	'You should have waited until I came, Margaret,' he said.

	'I tried to persuade her. '

	'I don't know. If she wants to see him so much, then Frederick must come - it would do her more good than any medicine. But the danger to Frederick is very great, I'm afraid.'

	'It is a long time since the mutiny, Father.'

	'When a man has been involved in a mutiny, the government never forgets. They will do anything to find him.'

	'Oh! What have I done? But it seemed so right at the time.'

	'No, I am glad you sent the letter,' Mr Hale said, trying to sound cheerful, but Margaret could see from his face that he was very anxious. They walked home without saying another word.

	The next day, Mr Thornton, who was a magistrate, had a meeting with the other Milton magistrates about the riot at his mill two days earlier. Many of these men were older and wealthier than he was, but they listened to his opinions with great respect.

	When he left the meeting, Mr Thornton's mind was clear, but within minutes he began to think about Margaret and to remember the feeling of her arms around him. He was walking back to the mill when he met Dr Donaldson, who told him the sad news about Mrs Hale. Mr Thornton asked if he could do anything to help, and when he was told that Mrs Hale often asked for fruit, he went immediately to the best shop in Milton and chose the finest fruit there. It was placed in a basket and he carried it himself, walking fast, to the Hales' house.

	The family were in the sitting-room, and he entered, his eyes shining with kindness, and presented the fruit to Mrs Hale. Margaret, who was sewing, was afraid of making any movement that would make him aware of her presence.

	'I'm afraid I cannot stay,' Mr Thornton said. 'But you must allow me the pleasure of bringing some fruit again. Good afternoon, Mr Hale. Goodbye, madam.'

	He was gone. Not one word, one glance at Margaret. She thought that he had not seen her.

	'How kind of him to think of me,' said Mrs Hale. 'Do you not think so, Margaret?'

	'Yes,' said Margaret quietly.

	After a few minutes she left the room and met Dixon, who handed her a note.

	'That young woman you go to see - Higgins, I mean. She died this morning. Her sister is here and wants to speak to you.'

	'Oh, poor Bessy,' said Margaret, bursting into tears, and she went down to the kitchen to see Mary. The girl, who had been crying so much that her face was swollen, explained that that morning, about an hour after Nicholas had gone out, Bessy had suddenly become very ill. Some neighbours had run to Mary's workplace to find her, but they had been unable to find her father. Mary had arrived only a few minutes before Bessy died.

	'She loved you so much. Please come and see her, madam. She would have wanted you to.'

	'Yes, I will. I'll come this afternoon.'

	That afternoon Margaret walked quickly to the Higgins'. Mary opened the door to her and they went upstairs to the room where Bessy lay. Her face, which had often looked so exhausted from pain, now had a soft smile, and although there were tears in Margaret's eyes, deep inside she felt very calm. So this was death! It looked more peaceful than life. Slowly, she turned away from the bed and she and Mary went downstairs without a word.

	Nicholas Higgins was standing in the middle of the room. He had only just learnt the news and his eyes were huge and dry and fierce. Margaret tried to creep past him, to leave him with his daughter, but he seized her arm and cried, 'Did you see her die?'

	'No,' answered Margaret, standing still.

	'You're sure she's dead?'

	'She is dead.'

	He looked at her searchingly, then suddenly threw himself halfway across the table and began to sob.

	'Get out of here!' he cried to Margaret.

	She took his hand and held it in hers. It was a long time before he was able to calm down, but then he asked her to come with him to Bessy's room and she did so.

	'Nothing can hurt her now,' he said, as he stood by his daughter's bed. He looked so pale and ill that Margaret had the idea of suggesting that he should talk to her father. Higgins desperately needed comfort and, knowing that Mr Hale had been a clergyman, agreed to visit him. Some neighbours came in to look after Mary and the two walked in silence to Crampton. Margaret quickly explained the situation to Mr Hale, and then led Higgins into the study. She went upstairs to see her mother and it was some time before she came down again. She was surprised to see the two men with their heads close together, apparently having a serious conversation. They looked up when Margaret came in and Higgins said proudly, 'We've been discussing religion and now we're talking about the strike.'

	'I wish some of the mill owners would meet some of you men and have a good talk about things,' said Mr Hale. 'I am sure it would be the best way of overcoming your difficulties. I wonder if Mr Thornton could be persuaded to do so?'

	'Thornton! He's the fellow who brought over the Irish workers! Then the leaders of the riot ruined it for everyone. Violence isn't the way. But now, when people would have thanked him for taking the riot leaders to court, Mr Thornton has decided not to do it. He says they won't be able to find work again, and that's enough punishment.'

	'Has the strike ended, then?' asked Margaret.

	'Yes,' said Nicholas angrily. 'The mill doors will open again tomorrow.'

	'Will you get your old job back?'

	'No chance. Hamper, my mill owner, thinks I'm a troublemaker. He'd rather cut his leg off than give my job back to me.'

	Margaret thought for a moment, and then said hesitantly, 'Why don't you go to Marlborough Mill and ask Mr Thornton?'

	Nicholas shook his head in disbelief. 'Mr Thornton? He won't see me!'

	'I will write a note for you to give him,' said Mr Hale, eager to help.

	'It's kind of you but I'll do it by myself or not at all. I'll go because you ask me, Miss Margaret. I'll wait for him tomorrow until he comes out of the mill. I'll tell him about the Boucher family and their troubles and that I want to help them. But the clock is striking ten. I must go.'

	He rose, looked steadily at Margaret and Mr Hale, brushed his hand across his eyes and left the room.

	'How proud that man is!' said Mr Hale, a little annoyed that Higgins had refused his offer of help.

	'Yes, but how strong and honest he is, too,' said Margaret.

	The next morning, a letter arrived from Edith. It was full of affection, like its writer, and described Edith's little boy, who had been born a few weeks earlier. Edith was very insistent that Margaret and her mother should come and stay with her in Corfu for at least three months; she did not ask Mr Hale, whom she blamed for taking the family away from Helstone.

	Margaret would have loved to go to Corfu and live Edith's life, just for one day. She was not yet twenty but she felt so old, and she thought that it might make her feel young again. Her mother came in and they were laughing about Edith's letter when Mr Thornton appeared, with another basket of fruit for Mrs Hale.

	He had come because of his great need to see Margaret again, but after he had glanced in her direction, he bowed coldly to her and turned away. He presented the fruit to Mrs Hale and talked kindly to her for a few minutes. He did not look at Margaret and, when she spoke, seemed not to hear her, although his next remark showed that he had. His behaviour was not polite at all, but it was clear to Margaret that the reason why he was behaving badly was because he was very hurt.

	He left with one last cold, offended look at her, unaware that his behaviour was making Margaret think about him more than ever before. She regretted hurting him so deeply, and would have been very happy to return to their previous relationship; she now realised that they had in fact been friends.

	Mr Thornton, as he walked downstairs, was proud of the way he had forced himself to see her and not reveal his feelings. He thought that he hated seeing the woman who had treated him so cruelly the previous day, but he was very wrong.



	Chapter nine

	Mrs Hale

	Mrs Thornton came to see Mrs Hale the next morning. Mrs Hale was much worse. A sudden change had taken place during the night, and now, with her grey face and hollow cheeks, she looked as if death could not be far away. Mrs Thornton had not believed that Mrs Hale was really ill, and she had only come because her son had insisted, but now that the reality of the younger woman's death was clear, she softened immediately.

	Mrs Hale lay still, then with a great effort reached for her visitor's hand and whispered, 'My child will be without a mother - in a strange place. If I die - will you - '

	'You wish me to be your daughter's friend.'

	Mrs Hale could not speak, but she pressed her visitor's hand.

	Mrs Thornton sighed. It was difficult to say that she would be kind to Margaret, whom she disliked so much. 'I am not the kind of person who shows affection, but I will be a true friend to Miss Hale. If she is in difficulty and comes to me for help, I will do everything I can for her. I also promise that if I ever see her doing something that I think is wrong, I will tell her, just as if she were my own daughter.'

	There was a long pause. Mrs Hale felt that this promise did not include everything and she did not really understand why, but perhaps this was because she was very ill.

	'I thank you,' she said. 'I shall never see you again in this world. But I thank you for your promise of kindness to my child.'

	'Not kindness,' said Mrs Thornton, but fortunately Mrs Hale did not hear her.

	Mrs Thornton held the dying woman's hand for a moment, and left the house without seeing anyone.

	Meanwhile, Margaret and Dixon were discussing how to keep Frederick's visit a secret from anyone except the family. A letter was expected any day, and he would certainly arrive soon afterwards. They decided that if Dixon needed help in the kitchen they would ask Mary Higgins. They knew that if she met Frederick, who would be known as Mr Dickinson, she would not be interested in finding out more about him.

	Poor Margaret! All that day she had to ignore her own feelings and look after her father, who sat in the sitting-room with his head in his arms. From time to time Mrs Hale suffered terrible pain, but in the evening she slept and Dixon sat with her. Darkness came. Margaret did not want to leave her father and the lamps had not been lit. She was sitting at the window looking out at the street when suddenly the doorbell rang.

	She jumped up and went down to open the door. A tall man was standing there, but she could not see his face.

	'Is this Mr Hale's?' he said clearly.

	Margaret trembled all over, then whispered 'Frederick' and held out her arms to him. They kissed each other.

	'Mother, is she alive?'

	'She is very, very ill, but she is alive.'

	'Thank God. Did you receive my letter?'

	'No, but we knew you would come.'

	Margaret took Frederick to Mr Hale's study and lit a lamp. Now she could see that his face was quite brown from the sun and that his eyes were very blue and bright. They did not exchange a word, but there was an immediate understanding between them and Margaret's heart was much lighter as she went upstairs.

	It took Mr Hale some time to understand that Frederick had come, and when he did he began to cry like a child. Leaning on Margaret's arm, he went down to the study and Margaret left him with Frederick. She ran upstairs and cried bitterly; it was the first time she had allowed herself this relief for days. Frederick had come! He was safe! She could hardly believe it. Feeling much better, she went into the kitchen, made the fire, lit lamps and prepared food for the traveller.

	She came into the study carrying the dishes like a servant, and Frederick immediately jumped up to take them from her; it was typical of his loving behaviour over the next few days. The brother and sister put some plates on the table, saying little, their hands touching, their eyes speaking to each other.

	They heard Dixon moving about in the kitchen and Margaret went to tell her the news. Mrs Hale was awake but they decided that they would not tell her that Frederick had arrived until after Dr Donaldson's visit in the morning. He would be able to tell them how to prepare her for seeing her son.

	Frederick and his father sat in the study talking while Margaret said nothing but listened quietly. It was a huge source of strength to her that her brother had come. She examined his appearance carefully and liked it. He had delicate features and a friendly, cheerful expression that could change suddenly and become very passionate. She could see that he understood his father's character and his weaknesses; he knew exactly how to talk to him and make him feel better. Perhaps because she was older now, the brother and sister felt closer to each other than ever before.

	When Mrs Hale saw Frederick the next morning, she seemed to improve. She sat with his hand in hers and would not let go of it even while she slept.

	'I am very selfish,' she said, 'but it will not be for long.'

	Frederick bent down and kissed the hand that imprisoned his.

	Kind Dr Donaldson told Margaret that her mother did not have many hours to live, but Frederick could not believe it. That night, however, Mrs Hale became unconscious and died before morning. Frederick, who had been so strong until then, now sobbed so violently that Margaret and Dixon feared that their next-door-neighbours would hear him. Margaret sat with her father in her mother's room. He did not speak but from time to time stroked his wife's face, making a soft sound, like an animal with her young. He ignored Margaret completely and her heart ached for him so much that she could not think of her own loss at all.

	Morning came and Margaret did her household duties, her eyes almost blinded with tears. Her father and brother were so full of grief that she felt she had to look after them. She made breakfast and lit a fire, but the contrast between its bright cheerfulness and her own thoughts made her kneel by the sofa and cry into the cushions. Dixon found her there and spoke gently to her, and the old servant's kindness made her feel a little better.

	At breakfast Mr Hale did not seem to know where he was and Frederick burst into tears. Afterwards, when Margaret tried to discuss the arrangements for the funeral, Mr Hale understood almost nothing, but asked Margaret to write to his friend Mr Bell in Oxford and tell him the news.

	Towards evening, Dixon told Margaret that she did not feel it was safe for Frederick to stay in Milton. She explained that while she was shopping she had met a young man called Leonards, whose family she had known in Southampton. He was a sailor and had been on the Russell at the same time as Frederick, although Dixon did not know if he had taken part in the mutiny. She had recognised Leonards and they had had a short conversation. He had asked about Frederick and talked about the mutiny, saying that Frederick would be hanged if he was caught. He said that a hundred pound reward had been offered for catching Frederick, and suggested that Dixon could help to trap him and that they would then share the reward. Dixon had never liked or trusted Leonards.

	Her story made Margaret feel very uncomfortable. 'Have you told Frederick?' she asked.

	'No, but I've told your father. And he thinks that Frederick must leave.'

	The two women felt the same, but it was very hard for Margaret, just when Frederick had returned to his family. She was sitting by the fire and thinking about this, when Frederick came in.

	'How tired you look, Margaret!' he said. 'You have been looking after everybody and no one has looked after you. Lie on the sofa - there is nothing for you to do.'

	Margaret gladly went to lie down and the two began to talk in low tones. Margaret told Frederick Dixon's story and he looked shocked.

	'Leonards was the worst sailor on the ship - and a really nasty fellow! All the sailors who had the right ideas were angry with the captain, but Leonards was always trying to please him. And he's here, in Milton! If he knew I was here, he'd tell the police without a doubt.'

	Mr Hale heard what they were saying and came towards them, eager and trembling. He took Frederick's hands in his.

	'My boy, you must go. It is very bad - but you must. You have done all you could - you have been a comfort to your mother.'

	'Perhaps I should stay and let them take me to court,' said Frederick thoughtfully.

	'No, you must go.'

	Frederick changed the subject. 'Do you know, I was in my bedroom this afternoon and the doorbell rang, so I waited for some time until I thought the visitor had left. Then I opened the door and saw a great, powerful fellow going down the stairs.'

	'It was Mr Thornton,' said Mr Hale.

	'Mr Thornton!' said Margaret, a little surprised. 'I thought you meant someone of a different class, not a gentleman.'

	He looked like someone who worked in a shop,' said Frederick carelessly, 'but it seems he is a manufacturer.'

	Margaret was silent, remembering how, before she knew Mr Thornton well, she had thought of him in just the same way. She wanted to make Frederick understand what kind of person Mr Thornton was, but she could not think what to say.

	Mr Hale continued, 'He came to offer to help us, but I could not see him. I told Dixon to ask if he wished to see you, Margaret.'

	Margaret was silent and after some moments, Frederick said, 'It is painful to think I can never thank those who have shown you kindness. But you could both come to Spain. I have a good job there and a promise of promotion. Margaret, I told you about Dolores Barbour; she is not yet eighteen, but I hope that in a year she will be my wife. You would love her if you knew her, I am sure. If you came, you would have so many friends.'

	'No - no more changes for me,' said Mr Hale. 'Moving here has cost me my wife. I am staying here.'

	'Oh, Frederick, I am so glad you have someone to love and care for you out there,' said Margaret. 'I know you took part in the mutiny, but for Dolores' sake, perhaps you should try and prove that the most serious accusations are not true.'

	A discussion began. Frederick did not know if it was possible to find the witnesses, all of them sailors, who could explain why the mutiny had happened.

	'I don't think the attempt would be successful,' he said doubtfully.

	'But could we not at least try to find them? There is a friend of mine - a lawyer, a very clever man - who would be happy to help you. Mr Henry Lennox, Father.' Margaret blushed when she said this.

	'I think it is a good idea,' said Mr Hale, 'but Frederick must not stay in England just to see him.'

	'Listen to my plan,' said Margaret. 'Frederick, you could take the night train to London tomorrow and leave a note from me for Mr Lennox at his home the following day. Then you could take the next boat from London.'

	Mr Hale and Frederick immediately agreed to the plan and Frederick wrote down a list of sailors' names. Margaret wrote the note to Lennox with Frederick looking over her shoulder, and she did not have time to worry about whether she was using the right words after their last, difficult meeting.

	The family sat together in the sitting-room all the next day. Mr Hale only spoke when his children asked him questions. Frederick was now ashamed that he had allowed his grief to overcome him, and although his sorrow was very real, he did not speak about it again. Margaret was suffering more now and spent a lot of the time crying.

	Mr Hale and Margaret wanted to make sure that Frederick was safely on the night train to London, and they decided that Margaret would accompany him to Outwood station. It was bitterly painful for Mr Hale to say goodbye to his son, and Margaret hurried Frederick into the carriage that was taking them there. They arrived at the station quite early and went to walk in a field next to the station. They were talking about their father when a horse rider passed slowly by. The evening sun was shining directly on Margaret's face and she bowed to the rider, who bowed stiffly back.

	'Who is that?' asked Frederick.

	'Mr Thornton - you saw him before, you know,' said Margaret, looking worried.

	By now it was time to return to the station, and Frederick went to buy his ticket. They were walking down the railway platform when they heard the sound of the approaching train. Just then, a porter came up to them. It was clear that he was drunk, and he pushed Margaret to one side, then seized Frederick by his collar.

	'Your name is Hale, I believe?'

	When Frederick heard this, he immediately pushed the man away, and the porter fell off the platform, a distance of three or four feet.

	'Run, run!' whispered Margaret urgently. 'The train is here. It was Leonards, wasn't it?'

	A carriage door was open and Frederick jumped into the train. As he leaned out to say goodbye, the train started to leave and Margaret was left standing alone. She felt so sick and faint that she went into the waiting room to sit down. When she felt a little better, she began to wonder if the man had been seriously hurt, and although she was frightened to do this, she went back to the platform to look for him. No one was there. She was trembling so much that she felt she could not walk home along the dark, lonely road, and she decided to take the next train back. But supposing Leonards recognised her as Frederick's companion?

	Fortunately, when she went to get her ticket, there were only a few railway officials there, talking loudly to one another.

	'So Leonards has been drinking,' said one of them. 'He came in about five minutes ago with a story about how he'd fallen off the platform. He wanted to borrow some money to go to London by the next train. I refused and he's gone off somewhere.'

	'To have another drink, I'd guess,' said another man.

	Frightened that Leonards would return, Margaret hid in the waiting room until the next train came. She was helped into the carriage by a porter whose face she did not dare to look at until the train started moving; then she saw that it was not Leonards.





	CHAPTER TEN

	A Police Inspector

	Home seemed unnaturally calm after Margaret's frightening experience at the station. Mary Higgins had come to work in the kitchen. Mr Hale did nothing except sit in his chair in a kind of waking dream, and Margaret decided not to tell him about the incident at the station as things had ended well. Although it was possible that Leonards would borrow money to go to London, it was unlikely that he would find Frederick there. Margaret decided not to worry about something she could do nothing to prevent, as in a day or two Frederick would be safely out of England.

	Mr Hale had wanted Mr Bell to come to the funeral, but his old friend sent an affectionate letter saying that, unfortunately, he was unwell and could not come, although he promised to visit in September. Mr Hale decided to invite Mr Thornton instead, but Margaret, who feared the idea of seeing Mr Thornton again, begged her father not to ask him, and in the end he agreed.

	The morning of the funeral arrived. Margaret had slept badly and was shocked to receive a letter from Frederick saying that Mr Lennox was away and would not be back for another two days. Consequently, Frederick had decided to stay in London until his return. His decision made Margaret very anxious; if Leonards had gone to London, he now had more time to find Frederick. But she could not think about this for long; her father was almost too weak to get into the funeral carriage, and he needed all Margaret's attention and support.

	When they arrived at the church for the funeral service, Margaret saw that Nicholas Higgins and Mary were there. She would have liked to talk to them but felt unable to leave her father. Mr Hale seemed to see nothing; he mechanically repeated the words of the clergyman, and at the end of the service he had to be led away as if he were blind.

	Dixon covered her face with her handkerchief and was so absorbed in her grief that she did not notice that people were leaving until someone spoke to her. It was Mr Thornton. He had been standing at the back of the crowd with his head bent, and no one had recognised him.

	'I'm sorry - but can you tell me how Mr Hale is? And Miss Hale too?'

	'Of course, sir. Mr Hale is very distressed. Miss Hale seems better than you would expect.'

	Mr Thornton would have preferred to hear that Margaret was really suffering. He was selfish enough to hope that his great love might be able to comfort her, but he was also disturbed by the memory of what he had seen at Outwood station. She had been with such a handsome young man and had seemed so relaxed and confident with him. What was she doing with a man at that late hour, so far away from home? All sorts of ideas went through his mind. Perhaps the reason why she was able to bear her grief was because of her love for this stranger!

	Mr Thornton's face grew pale when he heard Dixon's answer and he said coldly, 'I suppose I may call - and see Mr Hale, I mean.'

	He spoke as if he did not care at all, but although he hated Margaret at times, he desperately wanted to see her.

	For some reason, Dixon never told Margaret about her meeting with Mr Thornton, and so Margaret never learnt that he had attended her poor mother's funeral.

	Although, to an observer, Margaret did not seem to feel much grief, her pain was in reality so great that sometimes she wanted to scream. What made her and her father feel even worse was that two days had passed and there was still no letter from Frederick. Mr Hale was walking up and down the sitting-room, desperate with worry, when Dixon opened the door to announce Mr Thornton. He took Mr Hale's hands and held them for a minute or two, his face and eyes showing more sympathy than could be put into words. Then he turned to Margaret.

	She did not appear 'better than you would expect'. There was a look of great suffering on her face, and her eyes were red from crying. He had intended to greet her coldly, but he could not help going to her and speaking about her mother's death so gently that Margaret could not hide her emotion. She picked up her sewing and sat down. Mr Thornton's heart beat fast and for the moment he completely forgot about Outwood station.

	Just then, Dixon came in and said, 'Miss Hale, there is someone to see you.'

	She looked so upset that Margaret immediately thought that something had happened to Frederick. Feeling sick, she followed Dixon out of the room.

	'It's a police inspector. He's in the study.'

	'Did he name - ?'

	'No. He just asked if he could speak to you.'

	'Make sure Father does not come down.'

	The inspector was a little surprised by Margaret's haughty manner as she entered the study. She showed neither surprise nor curiosity, but stood waiting for him to speak.

	'I'm sorry, madam, but I need to ask you a few questions. A man called Leonards has died at the hospital. He had an accident - a fall - at Outwood station, between five and six last Thursday evening. The fill was not serious, but because of a previous illness and the man's alcohol habit, it killed him.'

	Margaret's large eyes opened a little, but otherwise she showed no emotion at all. She said, 'Well - go on!'

	'There will have to be an inquest,' said the inspector. He explained that a porter at the station had seen Leonards rudely push a young lady who was on the platform. She was with a companion who had then pushed Leonards off the edge of the platform. The porter said that he had not thought any more about the matter, because the platform was not high and he had seen Leonards get up and run down the platform.

	'A grocer's assistant who was on the platform thinks that the woman may have been you, madam,' said the inspector, watching Margaret carefully.

	'I was not there,' said Margaret expressionlessly.

	The inspector bowed, but did not speak. The grocer's assistant had not been sure that it was her and he thought that she was probably telling the truth.

	'Then, madam, you can assure me that you were not the companion of the gentlemen who pushed Leonards off the platform.'

	'I was not there,' said Margaret slowly and heavily.

	Margaret's exact repetition of her words made the inspector suspicious. Frowning, he said, 'I may have to call on you again this evening and ask you to appear at the inquest. You may need to give an alibi.'

	When Margaret's haughty expression did not change, the inspector decided that the grocer's assistant was probably wrong.

	'It is unlikely, madam, that this will happen. I hope you will forgive me for doing my duty.'

	Margaret bowed her head as the inspector walked towards the door. She opened it for him and accompanied him to the front door. Then she returned to the study, locked the door and fainted.

	Mr Thornton and Mr Hale talked for some time. Margaret's father found Mr Thornton wonderfully kind and comforting, and trusted him enough to tell him his most secret feelings. At the end of their conversation both men felt much closer to each other. Mr Thornton left the house, and was walking along the street when he met the police inspector, who was called Watson. They knew one another and Mr Thornton had helped Watson get his first job.

	They greeted each other in a friendly way and the police inspector said, 'I believe you were the magistrate who went to the hospital last night to hear the statement of a man called Leonards. He died several hours later.'

	'Yes, I'm afraid he was a drunken fellow,' said Mr Thornton.

	'Well, sir, his death is connected with somebody in the house I saw you coming out of just now - Mr Hale's house, I believe.'

	'Yes,' said Mr Thornton, looking at the inspector with sudden interest. 'What about it?'

	'There is some evidence that Miss Hale was the companion of the gentleman who pushed Leonards off the platform. A grocer's assistant who was there said that he recognised her, but the young lady denies that she was there at the time.'

	'Miss Hale denies she was there?' said Mr Thornton.

	'Yes, she denied it twice. Since you are the magistrate who saw Leonards, it seems a good idea to ask for your advice.'

	'She denies having been at the station,' said Mr Thornton in a low tone. He paused and then said, 'You are quite right to ask for my advice. Don't do anything until you have seen me again. It's now three o'clock. Come to my factory at four.'

	'I will, sir,' said Watson.

	The two men separated and Mr Thornton hurried to the factory, went to his office and locked the door. There, he thought about every detail of his lost two meetings with Margaret. She had looked so full of grief when he had seen her an hour ago that he had forgotten his suspicions. Now they were awakened again. Perhaps she was not as pure as she seemed; the thought came and then went immediately. But she had lied to the inspector, when she was usually so truthful. What did she fear would be revealed if she told the truth? Mr Thornton almost pitied her for the shame she must have felt to lie in this way.

	Suddenly, he jumped up. As a magistrate, he could prevent the inquest; then Margaret would not have to give an alibi. Even if she was in love with another man, he could still save her from being shamed in public. He might despise her for lying, but he could still protect her.

	He left his office and went out for about half an hour. When he returned, he wrote two lines on a piece of paper, which he put in an envelope. He instructed a clerk to give the note to Mr Watson when he came at four o'clock. The note contained these words: 'There will be no inquest as the medical evidence shows that there is no reason for one. Do not investigate further. The decision is my responsibility.'

	'Well,' thought Watson, 'that means I don't have to do a difficult job. None of my witnesses seemed certain of anything except the young woman.'

	That evening, Watson visited the Hales' house again. Margaret had had a terrible day. She had decided to say nothing to either Dixon or her father about her meeting with the inspector, but lay on the sofa looking ill, only speaking when spoken to. She tried to smile when her father looked anxiously at her, but only succeeded in sighing. At nine o'clock the inspector had still not come and Mr Hale said goodnight and went to bed. Margaret was preparing to do the same when the doorbell rang. She answered the door herself and led the inspector into the study.

	'You are late,' she said, hardly daring to breathe. 'Well?'

	'I'm sorry to have given you unnecessary trouble, madam. They've decided not to have the inquest.'

	'So there will be no more enquiries,' said Margaret.

	'I believe I've got Mr Thornton's note with me,' said the inspector.

	'Mr Thornton's!' said Margaret.

	'Yes, he's a magistrate. Ah! Here it is.'

	Margaret took it, but felt so confused that she could not understand what was written on the note. She held it in her hand and pretended to read it.

	'I met Mr Thornton this morning, just as he was coming out of this house,' the inspector continued. 'He's an old friend of mine and he's also the magistrate who saw Leonards last night, so I explained my problem to him.'

	Margaret sighed deeply. She was afraid of what she might hear and wished the man would go. She forced herself to speak.

	'Thank you for calling. It is very late.'

	He held out his hand for the note and she gave it back to him, then said, 'The writing is small and I could not read it. Could you read it to me?'

	He read it aloud to her.

	'You told Mr Thornton I was not there?'

	'Oh, of course, madam. I'm sorry to have troubled you. The young man seemed so sure at first and now he says he was never sure at all. Good night, madam.'

	She rang the bell and Dixon came to show the inspector out. As the servant returned up the passage, Margaret passed her.

	'It is all right,' she said, without looking at her, and before Dixon could say anything, she ran upstairs to her bedroom and locked the door. Then she threw herself on her bed, feeling much too exhausted to do anything but lie motionless.

	After half an hour, she felt a little better and sat up. Her first feeling was one of huge relief; there would be no inquest and so there was no danger that Frederick would be identified as her companion at the station. She then started to try and remember every word that the inspector had said about Mr Thornton. When had the inspector seen him? What had Mr Thornton said? What had he done? What were the exact words of his note? Until she could remember every word in the note, her mind refused to go further. But the facts were clear enough: Mr Thornton had seen her close to Outwood station last Thursday night and had been told that she had denied being there. Margaret did not tell herself that there was a good excuse for her lies. Nor did she imagine that Mr Thornton would be suspicious of the fact that she was with a handsome young man. There was only one thing that concerned her; the fact was that Mr Thornton now saw her as a liar. She was a liar and he knew it and must despise her for it.

	'Oh, Frederick!' Margaret cried, 'What a price I have paid for saving you!'

	She fell asleep with these thoughts going round and round in her mind.

	When she woke the next morning, and the full memory of the situation returned to her, another thought came to her; it was because Mr Thornton had learnt about her denial that he had decided there would be no inquest. He had done this so that she would not have to give an alibi at the inquest. But if this were true, Margaret did not feel at all grateful, as it meant that he realised that she had done something very wrong. In that case, Margaret thought that he must feel great contempt for her. She hated the thought that he had saved her, and wondered what Leonards had told him. Perhaps he had told Mr Thornton about Frederick, or perhaps Mr Thornton had heard the story from Mr Bell. If so, then the mill owner had lied to save Mr Hale's son, who had come to see his dying mother. In that case, then she should be grateful to him. But she feared that he did not know the real facts and only saw her as a liar who must be saved. Margaret had always seen herself as superior to Mr Thornton. She was in a different position now and felt very unhappy about it. She did not ask herself why it mattered so much to her that Mr Thornton should despise her.

	Dixon knocked at the door and came in. 'Here's something that will make you feel better - a letter from your brother.'

	Margaret thanked Dixon, but waited until she was alone before she opened the letter. The first thing that she noticed was that the letter had been sent two days ago; it should have arrived the day before. Frederick wrote that he had seen Mr Lennox, who had said that it was very dangerous indeed for him to have returned to England. But after some discussion the lawyer had also agreed that it would be worthwhile finding witnesses who could tell the real story of what happened on the Russell. Then perhaps the trial could take place and the court would decide that Frederick was innocent.

	'It seemed to me, little sister,' wrote Frederick, 'that your letter made him very anxious to help me. He's an intelligent fellow. I am on a boat that will leave in five minutes. What an escape that was! Don't tell anyone I came to England - not even the Shaws.'

	Margaret could not have been more thankful that Frederick was safe. But the date on the letter told her that he had left England thirty hours ago! There had been no need for her to lie to the inspector and make Mr Thornton despise her! But why did she keep thinking about Mr Thornton? Why did she care so much about his opinion of her? What were these strong feelings that made her tremble and hide her face in the pillow?

	She dressed and took the letter to her father, who she knew would not pay any attention to Frederick's words about the incident at the station. Mr Hale was very relieved that his son was safe but was concerned about Margaret, who seemed very distressed.

	'Poor child, poor child,' he said and made her lie down on the sofa and cover herself with a shawl.

	Through the day he tried hard to be cheerful, and Margaret was grateful to him. Mr Thornton had said that he might call that evening with a book for Mr Hale, but Margaret knew he would not come since he would be afraid of meeting her so soon after what had happened. She realised now that it was wrong of her to feel ungrateful. Oh, but she was grateful! It was a pleasure to her to realise how much she respected him.

	The book from Mr Thornton arrived that evening with a kind note inside, but as Margaret had guessed, he did not come himself. By now, she felt very confused. She felt great shame when she thought about meeting him again, but at the same time she very much wanted to see him. But Mr Thornton did not come the next day, nor the day after that. This surprised and upset Mr Hale, as Mr Thornton had promised that he would call. Every time that the doorbell rang, both father and daughter hoped that it was the mill owner; but he did not come.



	Chapter eleven

	A Woman in Love

	What most upset Mr Thornton about Margaret's lie was that it concerned an attractive young man. He could not forget that Margaret had looked at this man as if she loved him. And then there was the fact that she had been with him in the evening, when it was growing dark, at some distance from home. The fact that she had lied showed that she had done something wrong and needed to hide it. Mr Thornton decided that Margaret, who was usually so truthful, was prepared to do something wrong because of her love for this stranger. This thought made him fiercely jealous and very bad-tempered. At home he was more than usually silent, and annoyed his mother by walking up and down the sitting-room without speaking.

	'Can you stop - can you sit down for a moment?' said his mother crossly one evening. 'I have something to tell you.'

	He sat down and Mrs Thornton continued, 'Betsy is so upset by her lover's death that she cannot work for us any more and is going to leave us.'

	'Her lover was Leonards, you told me.'

	'Yes. And she has told me that Miss Hale was with the young man who pushed Leonards off the platform. She was walking in a field with him, apparently, quite late in the evening.'

	'I don't see why that should concern us.'

	'I am glad to hear you say so,' said Mrs Thornton, looking pleased. 'But I - I made a promise to her mother that if her daughter did something wrong, I would speak to her about it.'

	'I don't see any harm in what she did that evening,' said Mr Thornton, getting up and turning his face away.

	'You would not have approved if Fanny had done it.'

	'Miss Hale and Fanny are very different. Miss Hale always has a good reason for doing something, unlike Fanny.'

	'How kind you are about your sister! Miss Hale's behaviour is clear to me now. The man she was with is her lover.'

	Mr Thornton turned round to look at his mother, his face very grey and said, 'Yes, mother, I do believe he is her lover.'

	The pain of admitting this was almost too much to bear, and he turned away from her, then immediately turned round again and said, 'Mother, he is her lover. But she may need help and advice. I know that something is wrong - she is in difficulty. Go to her and advise her.'

	'What do you mean, John?' said his mother, really shocked. 'What do you know?'

	He did not answer, and after some moments she said, 'I will go to her and speak to her as if she were Fanny and had gone walking with a young man in the evening. Then I shall have kept my promise to her mother and done my duty.'

	'You cannot talk to her in that way. She is much too proud.'

	'I can and I will.'

	'Well,' Mr Thornton said, going to the door, 'don't tell me any more about it. I can't bear to think about it.'

	'Oh, Margaret, could you not have loved me?' he said fiercely to himself, as he locked himself in his office. 'I may not be a gentleman, but I would never have made you lie for me.'

	Margaret was sitting alone, writing a letter to Edith, when Dixon opened the door to announce Mrs Thornton. Margaret was so gentle and polite that Mrs Thornton found it very difficult to say her carefully prepared words. It was only as she stood up to leave that she coughed and said, 'Miss Hale, I promised your mother that if you behaved badly in any way, I would do my duty and give you my opinion of your behaviour.'

	Margaret blushed. She thought that Mrs Thornton was going to speak to her about the lie she had told, and that Mr Thornton had asked her to do this.

	Mrs Thornton continued, 'At first, when I heard that you had been seen walking with a gentleman, in the evening, as far away from home as Outwood station, I could hardly believe it. But my son confirmed the story. It was not at all wise of you, Miss Hale. The story could harm your reputation.'

	Margaret's eyes flashed fire. So Mrs Thornton had not come to talk to her about the fact that she had lied. Instead, Mrs Thornton wanted to discuss her behaviour, when she hardly knew her at all! It was too rude!

	Seeing how angry Margaret was, Mrs Thornton became angry too. 'For your mother's sake, I felt it was my duty to talk to you about your behaviour.'

	'For my mother's sake!' exclaimed Margaret tearfully. 'She never wished you to insult me, I am sure.'

	'Insult you, Miss Hale!'

	'Yes, madam,' said Margaret more steadily. 'What do you know about me that would make you suspect - Oh!' she said, covering her face with her hands, 'I know now, Mr Thornton has told you - '

	'No, Miss Hale,' said Mrs Thornton, 'Mr Thornton has told me nothing. Listen, young lady, and you will understand what kind of man you have refused. This Milton manufacturer, whom you despise so much, told me that he believed that you were in difficulties because of a gentleman and that you needed some advice. He admitted that you had been seen with a gentleman at Outwood station; but apart from that, he has said nothing.'

	Margaret was still crying, with her face hidden in her hands, and Mrs Thornton softened and said, 'Perhaps there are circumstances that can explain your behaviour.'

	Margaret considered what to say but could not find a good explanation. Finally, she said in a low voice, 'I can give you no explanation. I have done wrong, but not in the way you think. I think Mr Thornton judges me more kindly than you.'

	'It is the last time I shall try to give you advice,' said Mrs Thornton stiffly. 'I only came because your mother asked me to. I never liked the fact that my son cared for you. You did not appear to be good enough for him. But your behaviour during the riot showed that you cared for him too. When the servants and workers started talking about you, I felt that it was right for him to ask you to marry him. But when he came to see you, your feelings had changed. I told him that I thought that perhaps your lover - '

	'What must you think of me, madam?' said Margaret, throwing back her head haughtily. 'Please do not continue. I will not try to explain my actions. You must allow me to leave.' And she left the room with the noiseless grace of a princess.

	Mrs Thornton was not particularly annoyed by Margaret's behaviour; she did not care enough about her for that. The fact that her words had upset Margaret pleased her, as it showed that Margaret cared about what people thought of her. 'I like to see a girl get angry at the idea of being talked about,' thought Mrs Thornton. 'It shows that she has the right kind of pride.'

	After she had left Mrs Thornton, Margaret went to her room and made herself recall every word they had spoken. Then she said sadly to herself, 'Her words can't really affect me because I was not with a lover, I was with Frederick! But it's awful, knowing that she thinks this about me. She doesn't know my real sin - that I lied. He never told her - I should have known he would not!'

	Then a new thought came to her. 'He too must think poor Frederick is my lover. I understand now. It's bad enough that he knows that I lied, but he also believes that someone else cares for me, and that I - Oh dear! Why do I care about what he thinks? I don't know why, but I am very miserable. He misunderstands me so completely and I feel terrible!'

	She jumped up. 'No, I will not examine my own feelings. It would be useless. If I live to be an old woman, perhaps I'll sit by the fire and think about the life I might have had. There must be many women who have made the same mistake and only realise when it's too late. I was so rude to him that day! But I did not understand my feelings then. I don't even know when they began. I must be strong. It will be difficult, but when I see him I will be very calm and quiet. But I may not see him; he has not called for some days. That would be worst of all.'

	To try and forget about her feelings, Margaret decided to visit the Higgins' next-door-neighbours, the Bouchers, but when she arrived at their house, a neighbour told her that Mrs Boucher was dying. A doctor had been called and the children were being looked after by neighbours. Margaret decided that the best thing she could do was call on the Higgins. She went next door and found Nicholas Higgins playing with the three youngest Boucher children.

	'Have you seen Mr Thornton?' she asked Nicholas.

	'Yes,' said Nicholas angrily.

	'He refused you?' said Margaret sorrowfully.

	'Of course he did. I knew he would.'

	'I am sorry I asked you. You told him I sent you? .

	'I don't know if I mentioned your name. I said a woman had advised me to ask him.'

	'I am disappointed in Mr Thornton,' said Margaret.

	There was a slight noise behind her. Margaret turned round and saw Mr Thornton standing at the door with a look of angry surprise on his face. In one quick movement, Margaret stood up and left without saying a word. As she hurried to Mrs Boucher's, she heard the door shut loudly behind her.

	Mr Thornton had come to see Higgins because, although he tried to hide it, there was a part of him that was very soft. He had refused Higgins because he had heard reports that the man was a troublemaker, but afterwards he had learnt that Higgins had waited five hours to see him and he was impressed by the man's patience; he had also learnt that the worker's story about the Boucher family was true. He had come to Higgins's house to offer him work.

	Higgins was a proud man; there was a long pause before he accepted the offer, but he did and the two men shook hands.

	'Was that the woman who advised you to ask me for work?' asked Mr Thornton.

	Higgins told him that it was. Mr Thornton frowned, disliking the idea that Margaret might think he had given Higgins work because of her, when he was only doing what was right.

	As Mr Thornton left, Margaret came out of the Bouchers' house. She did not see him, and he followed her, admiring her tall, graceful figure. Then he suddenly felt very jealous. He wanted to speak to her and see how she would behave after all that had happened. Also, he had heard her last words and wanted her to know that he had given Higgins work.

	He came up to her and she looked at him in surprise.

	'You do not need to be disappointed in me, Miss Hale. I have given Higgins work.'

	'I am glad,' said Margaret coldly.

	There was a silence and then Mr Thornton said, 'Miss Hale, have you no explanation for the lie that you told? You must know what it has made me think.'

	Margaret said nothing. She was wondering whether she could give some kind of an explanation and still be loyal to Frederick.

	'No,' said Mr Thornton, 'I will ask no more questions. Believe me, your secret is safe with me. But please be careful. I am now only speaking as a friend of your father.'

	'I am aware of that,' said Margaret, forcing herself to appear uninterested. 'But the secret is about another person, and I cannot explain it without harming him.'

	I have no desire to know the gentleman's secrets,' said Mr Thornton angrily. 'My only interest in you is - as a friend. That is all, now. You believe me, Miss Hale?'

	'Yes,' said Margaret quietly and sadly.

	'Then really, I don't see why we should continue walking together. I thought perhaps that you might have something to say, but I see that we mean nothing to each other. If you are quite certain that I no longer have any strong feelings for you, then I wish you good afternoon.' And he walked away.

	'What can he mean?' wondered Margaret. 'He talks as if I thought he still cared about me, when I know he cannot. His mother will have said all those cruel things about me. But I will try my best not to care about him. Surely I can control this wild, miserable feeling that tempted me to betray Frederick, just so that he would respect me again. I must be strong - I must!'

	Several months passed, and although Mr Thornton occasionally came for lessons with Mr Hale, he never asked to see Margaret. After her conversation in the street with Mr Thornton, Margaret's moods varied strangely, but a letter from Edith made her feel a little less miserable, as her cousin talked about returning to Harley Street in about six months and inviting her to stay. Life became quiet and boring. Margaret looked after the house and her father, visited Mary Higgins and helped to care for the Boucher children after the death of their mother. Then in September, as he had promised, Mr Bell came to visit. Mr Hale's old friend liked Margaret enormously and they immediately became very good friends.

	'I must say, I think your opinions are very old-fashioned,' said Margaret jokingly to Mr Bell one afternoon.

	'Listen to this daughter of yours, Hale. What has life in Milton done to her? She has become a democrat!'

	'You say that just because I believe that commerce is good for the country.'

	'I don't like this rushing around, with everybody trying to get rich. I don't believe there's a man in Milton who knows how to sit still. That reminds me, Mr Thornton is coming to tea tonight,' said Mr Bell, not noticing that Margaret became very quiet.

	Mr Thornton was still in love with Margaret, despite all his efforts not to be. He had tried hard not to see her, but in his dreams she came dancing towards him with open arms. He came late to the Hales' house and, to avoid meeting her, spent a long time talking about business matters with Mr Bell. He was bad-tempered and cross and Mr Bell thought he had become quite a rude fellow. At last they went upstairs and found Margaret holding a letter, which she was eagerly discussing with her father.

	'It is a letter from Henry Lennox,' said Mr Hale to Mr Bell. 'It makes Margaret very hopeful.'

	Mr Bell nodded. Mr Thornton looked at Margaret, who blushed, and he wanted to leave and never return again.

	A conversation began about the differences between Oxford University, where Mr Bell taught, and Milton, where he had lived as a child. Mr Bell talked about the importance of tradition, history and learning, while Mr Thornton felt that action and living in the present mattered more. Mr Bell joked a lot, and Margaret saw that this upset Mr Thornton, who wanted a serious conversation.

	Trying to change the subject, she said, 'Edith says that cotton materials in Corfu are cheaper and better than those in London.'

	'Are you sure?' said her father. 'I think Edith is exaggerating.'

	'If Margaret is sure, then I am too,' said Mr Bell. 'Margaret, you are such a truthful person, I don't believe that anyone who is a relation of yours could exaggerate.'

	'Is Miss Hale so well-known for truthfulness?' said Mr Thornton, bitterly. The moment he said this, he could have bitten his tongue out. Why was he so evil tonight and why was he so cross with Mr Bell, his kind old friend?

	Margaret did not get up and leave as she would have done formerly. She glanced at Mr Thornton in sad surprise, with the expression of a hurt child, then bent over her sewing and did not speak again.

	Mr Thornton could not help looking at her and he saw that when she sighed, her whole body trembled. He desperately wanted her to look at him and speak to him, so that he could show her he was sorry, but she did not raise her head. She could not care for him, he thought. He gave short, sharp answers to the older men's questions and left rather suddenly. As he walked home, he thought that he was right to see Margaret as little as possible; her power over him was too great.

	When the mill owner left, Margaret silently began to fold up her work, looking completely exhausted. As the three prepared for bed, Mr Bell said, 'Success has spoiled that man. He used to be a simple, honest fellow. Now, everything offends him.'

	'He was not his usual self tonight,' Margaret said quickly. 'Something must have happened to upset him.'

	Mr Bell looked at her sharply. After she had left the room, he said, 'Hale, have you ever thought that Thornton and your daughter might be fond of each other?'

	'Never!' said Mr Hale, astonished by the idea. 'I am sure you are wrong. If there is anything, it is all on Mr Thornton's side.'

	'I would say that she showed quite a few signs tonight!'

	'I am sure you are wrong,' said Mr Hale. 'Margaret has been almost rude to Mr Thornton at times.'

	'Well, it was only a suggestion. And whether I'm right or wrong, I'm very sleepy.'

	Mr Bell left the next day, telling Margaret that she must come to him if she was in difficulty. To Mr Hale he said, 'That Margaret of yours has gone deep into my heart. Take care of her - she is a very precious creature. I wish you'd leave Milton, Hale! It is completely unsuitable for you, and I'm sorry I recommended it. You and Margaret could come and live with me. I would like that very much. What do you think?'

	'Never!' said Mr Hale. 'My one great change has been made, and it has caused me great suffering. I will live here and I will be buried here.'

	'Well, we will forget it for the moment. Margaret, give me a goodbye kiss. Remember, I am always here for you.'



	CHAPTER TWELVE

	Mr Hale

	After Mr Bell's departure, life returned to what it had been before his visit. Four months passed. Margaret tried to keep herself busy visiting the Boucher children, and was always kind and attentive to her father, but the truth was that she felt bored and miserable. Mr Thornton seldom came to his lessons, partly because, as a result of the strike, his business affairs had become more complicated. When he did come, he never asked to see Margaret, and often sent a note at the last moment, saying that he was too busy for a lesson. Although Mr Hale had new pupils to replace Mr Thornton, he missed their conversations and became quite depressed by his pupil's frequent absences.

	One February evening Mr Hale, blushing as he asked the question, suddenly said, 'Margaret, have you ever had any reason to think that Mr Thornton cared for you?'

	Margaret did not answer immediately, then bent her head and said, 'Yes. I believe - oh, Father, I should have told you.' And dropping her work, she hid her face in her hands.

	'No dear, there was no need. I am sure you would have told me if you had returned his feelings. Did he speak to you about it?'

	No answer at first, then a slow 'Yes'.

	'And yon refused him?'

	A long sigh and another 'Yes'. Then, blushing even more, she said, 'Now, Father, I have told you this, but I cannot tell you more - it is too painful for me. Oh, Father, it is because of me that Mr Thornton is no longer your friend, and I am so sorry; but I could not help it.'

	They were quiet for some minutes. Mr Hale stroked Margaret's cheek and was almost shocked to find her face wet with tears. As he touched her, she jumped up, smiling brightly, and began to talk about the Lennoxes with such eagerness to change the subject that he was too kind to refer to it again.

	'Tomorrow - yes, tomorrow the Lennoxes will be back in Harley Street. How strange it will be! Imagine, Edith a mother!'

	'Why don't you go and see them for a fortnight?' said her father. 'It would be very good for you, and Mr Lennox could tell you his latest news about Frederick.'

	'No, Father, you need me here,' said Margaret. After a pause, she continued sadly, 'I am losing hope about Frederick. Mr Lennox is trying to tell us the news gently, but you can see from his letters that he thinks there is no hope of finding witnesses.'

	A few days later, Margaret's feelings were confirmed when Frederick wrote saying that he had received a letter from Henry Lennox stating that it was unlikely that the witnesses could be found. Frederick angrily said that he no longer considered himself English, which made Margaret cry. But in March, a much happier letter arrived; Frederick and Dolores had got married. Dolores's family owned a large manufacturing company and Frederick was now certain to achieve a high position in it. Margaret smiled a little when she learnt this, remembering her former dislike of trade. And now her brother was a trader! Well, it did not matter at all, and Frederick was very, very happy.

	Spring came, and Margaret became a little worried about her father, who occasionally had difficulty breathing. When Mr Bell invited them to visit him in Oxford, she persuaded Mr Hale to accept, hoping that it would improve his health. The invitation included Margaret, but she decided to stay at home; with her father away, she would have no responsibilities and would be able to rest, something that she had not been able to do since she came to Milton.

	Margaret was astonished at how relieved she felt once her father had left. The pressure was gone; there was no-one who depended on her for comfort and entertainment. For months, she had had no time to think about her problems, but now she could examine them one by one and give each of them the right place in her life. She sat almost motionless for hours, remembering every detail of her relationship with Mr Thornton.

	After two days of silent thinking, she decided that if only she could be friends with him again, or even if he would visit her father more often, she would feel happier. But when she went to bed that night, a feeling of sorrow and anxiety still remained.

	That April evening, Margaret had found that she could not stop thinking about her father. Strangely, that same night, in Oxford, all Mr Hale's thoughts were about his daughter. His old friends there were very kind to him, but the unfamiliar social activity had made him feel quite exhausted.

	'I am tired,' he told Mr Bell. 'But I am fifty-five years old.'

	'Nonsense! I'm over sixty. You're quite a young man.'

	Mr Hale shook his head. 'These last few years -' he said. And then, after a pause, he went on, 'About Margaret. If I die - '

	'Nonsense!'

	'I often think - what will happen to her? I suppose the Lennoxes will ask her to live with them. I hope they will.'

	'You know how fond I am of that girl, Hale. She has made me her slave! I will look after her, and when I die, everything I have will be hers. But you're a thin, healthy fellow, unlike me. There are no prizes for guessing who will die first.'

	But Mr Bell was wrong, and that night Mr Hale lay down in his bed for the last time. The servant who entered in the morning received no answer to his words. Mr Hale's heart had stopped during the night, but his calm, beautiful face showed no pain, only the white, cold look of death.

	Mr Bell was so shocked that he could not speak for some time. Then he told his servant to pack his bags, and took the next train to Milton. There was only one person sitting near him. The man's face was hidden behind a newspaper and it was some time before Mr Bell realised that it was Mr Thornton.

	The two shook hands, and when Mr Bell told the mill owner the bad news, Mr Thornton said nothing for over a quarter of an hour. Finally he said, 'What about -?' and stopped suddenly.

	'Margaret, you mean. Yes, I am going to Milton to tell her. I will look after her as if she were my own child. I would like her to come and live me, but there are those Lennoxes!'

	'Who are they?' asked Mr Thornton, trembling with interest.

	'Oh, fashionable London people. Captain Lennox married her cousin - the girl she was brought up with. And there's her aunt, Mrs Shaw. And then there's that brother.'

	'What brother?'

	'The brother of Captain Lennox - a clever young lawyer. I'm told he's been interested in Margaret for a long time. Now that she will have money, he will be even more interested in her.'

	'What money?' asked Mr Thornton, far too interested to realise how rude the question was.

	'Well, she'll have my money at my death.'

	Mr Thornton became very silent when he heard this. Finally, Mr Bell asked him where he had been and the mill owner explained that he had been to France on business.

	'Ah, commerce! Poor old Hale! Milton is so different from Helstone - a charming little village in the New Forest.'

	'I understand it was a great change for Mr Hale.'

	When Mr Bell arrived at the house in Compton, Margaret, who was standing at an upstairs window, saw him get out of the carriage alone and guessed the truth immediately. She stood in the middle of the sitting room, looking as if she had been turned into stone.

	'Oh, don't tell me! I know it from your face! You would not have left him - if he were alive! Oh, Father, Father!'

	The shock was very great, and for more than two days Margaret lay on the sitting-room sofa with her eyes closed, hardly speaking at all. Mr Bell needed to return to Oxford and make arrangements for the funeral, which would be held there rather than in Milton, because of the problems of transporting the body. However, it was clear that Margaret was not well enough to travel to Oxford to attend the funeral. After a lot of thought, Mr Bell decided to write to Mrs Shaw, who had returned to England, and ask her to come to Milton. His letter to her had an immediate effect, and the following day she travelled up by train.

	Margaret was the first to hear her aunt's carriage when it stopped in front of the house. Her whole face trembled, and when Mr Bell came up with Mrs Shaw, she was standing up, looking very unsteady. Her aunt opened her arms and Margaret went into them and started to cry.

	Mr Bell crept out of the room and went down to the study. There, he tried to forget his troubles by examining the books, but they only reminded him of his dead friend. He was glad to hear the sound of Mr Thornton's voice at the front door and called out, 'Thornton, is that you? Come in for a minute or two.'

	The mill owner joined him and Mr Bell told him that Mrs Shaw had come to look after Margaret.

	'The woman has brought a servant with her, and I shall have to leave and find somewhere to stay.'

	'Come and stay with us. We have five or six empty bedrooms.'

	'Then I'll just go upstairs and say goodbye to the poor girl and that aunt, and leave with you immediately.'

	It was some time before Mr Bell came down again, and as they set out for Marlborough Street he explained why.

	'Mrs Shaw is anxious to return home with Margaret as soon as possible. She doesn't seem to understand that the girl cannot travel in her present condition. Margaret said she has friends she must see, but then she started crying and said she was glad to leave a place where she had suffered so much. I must return to Oxford tomorrow, so a decision must be made.'

	Mr Thornton did not reply. The words 'She was glad to leave a place where she had suffered so much' were going round and round in his head. So that was the way Margaret would remember her time in Milton, when to him every moment he had spent with her had been so precious.

	They arrived in Marlborough Street and Mrs Thornton, after welcoming Mr Bell, asked how Margaret was.

	'She seems completely broken. I would like her to live with me but she has relations who want her to live with them in London.'

	'Where have these relations been, when Miss Hale has had so many troubles?'

	Having asked the question, Mrs Thornton, who felt no interest in the answer, left to prepare Mr Bell's room.

	'They have been living abroad,' Mr Bell said. 'The aunt brought her up, and Margaret and her cousin have been like sisters. But I wanted her as a child of my own, and I am jealous of these people who don't seem to have looked after her properly. It would be different if Frederick claimed her.'

	'Frederick!' exclaimed Mr Thornton. 'Who is he?'

	'Frederick!' said Mr Bell in surprise. 'Don't you know? He's her brother. Have you not heard - ?'

	'I have never heard his name before. Where is he? Who is he?'

	'He is the son who was involved in that mutiny.'

	'I had never heard of him until this moment. Where does he live?'

	'In Spain. He's likely to be arrested if he comes to England.'

	'Was he here in Milton at the time of Mrs Hale's death?'

	'No, it's not possible. What made you think he was?'

	'I saw a young man walking with Miss Hale one day,' replied Mr Thornton, 'and I think it was about that time.'

	'Oh, that was probably young Lennox, the Captain's brother. He's a lawyer and Margaret and he write to each other. Do you know,' said Mr Bell, watching Mr Thornton carefully, 'when I last came here I wondered if you perhaps cared for Margaret.'

	'I admired Miss Hale, as everyone must. She is a beautiful creature,' said Mr Thornton quickly.

	'Is that all? A beautiful creature! You talk about her as if she were a horse or dog!'

	Mr Thornton's eyes flashed for a moment. 'Mr Bell,' he said, 'you should remember that not every man can talk about their feelings as freely as you. Let us talk about something else.'

	The two men began to discuss business matters. A new building was being put up in Mr Thornton's factory yard and Mr Bell asked what it would be. Mr Thornton explained that he planned it as a dining-room for his workers and told Mr Bell the following story. He had slowly become friendly with one of his workers, a man called Higgins. Passing by the man's house one day, he had called on him, and had been shocked to see how little the family had to eat, and what bad quality the meat was. After discussions with Higgins, the mill owner decided to buy large quantities of good-quality food at a cheap price, and to provide a large oven at the mill and a cook. For some months now, the workers had been able to have a good lunch there. Mr Thornton had even started eating with the men from time to time and was enjoying his conversations with them.

	'I am really getting to know some of them now. They have such a sense of humour! But it is not a charity and the men pay me rent for the oven and the cooking-place at the back of the mill. They will have to pay more for the dining-room.'

	Mrs Shaw hated noisy, smoky Milton and wanted to return to London the day after the funeral in Oxford. Margaret was too weak and exhausted to resist her and it was agreed that she would return with her aunt, and that Dixon would stay behind to pack up the furniture.

	The day before the funeral Margaret received a letter from Mr Bell in Oxford:

	'My dear Margaret,

	I intended to return to Milton after the funeral but unfortunately I have duties here that mean I cannot come. Captain Lennox and Mr Thornton are here. The Captain will come to Milton to take you and his mother home and I have asked my lawyer to arrange the sale of your house. Now, there is something else. You may not know this, but I told your father that when I die you will inherit my money and my possessions. I don't intend to die yet, of course! But meanwhile, I would like to make a formal arrangement to give you 250 pounds a year. It is yours and you can pay the Lennoxes this for as long as you live with them. They can then pay for Dixon. I will make another arrangement about money for your needs - items such as pretty dresses and chocolate! Now, Margaret, you may be wondering what right an old man has to settle your affairs in this way. But I have loved your father for thirty-five years, and I have no relations to look after or give my money to. Please make an old man happy and tell me that Margaret Hale is not the girl to say no. Write to me, and tell me your answer. But do not thank me.'

	After reading this, Margaret took a pen and wrote with a trembling hand, 'Margaret Hale is not the girl to say no.'

	For the next two days, she wandered round the house, trying to decide which things she wanted to keep. She asked Dixon to take one of her father's books to Mr Thornton after she had left, and wrote a note to him very quickly.

	The day after the funeral, she took a carriage to the Higgins' and said a sad goodbye to them. Feeling that she should also say goodbye to Mrs Thornton, although she did not wish to do this, she went to visit her with her aunt, and Mrs Thornton, looking kinder than ever before, was introduced to Mrs Shaw.

	'Where are you going to live, Miss Hale?' Mrs Thornton asked. 'Mr Bell told me that you were going to leave Milton.'

	'My niece will live with me in London. She is almost like a daughter to me,' said her aunt, looking fondly at Margaret.

	At this moment, Mr Thornton entered the room; he had only just returned from Oxford.

	'John,' said his mother, 'this lady is Mrs Shaw, Miss Hale's aunt. I am sorry to say that Miss Hale's visit is to say goodbye.'

	'You are going then?' he said in a low voice.

	'Yes,' said Margaret. 'We leave tomorrow.'

	Mr Thornton turned away and seemed to be examining something on the table. He did not even seem to be aware that they had got up to leave, but he went outside with them and helped Mrs Shaw into the carriage.

	He and Margaret were standing close together on the doorstep, and the memory of the day of the riot came back to both of them. He thought of how cruel she had been to him when he had gone to see her the next day, and although his heart was beating fast with his love for her, he told himself, 'Let her go, with her stony heart and her beauty. How coldly she looks at me! Let her go!'

	And there was no tone of regret or emotion in his voice as he said goodbye. He took the hand she offered to him as if it were a dead flower; but no one saw Mr Thornton again that day.



	Chapter thirteen

	A New Life

	Edith gave birth to her second child and, as was the custom, remained quietly in her room for several weeks afterwards. Consequently, the house in Harley Street was less busy than usual, and Margaret was able to rest and try to understand the sudden change that had taken place in her life. Once again, she was well looked after and living in a luxurious house. Mrs Shaw and Edith were delighted that she had returned 'home', and Captain Lennox was kind and brotherly to her. Margaret felt that it was almost ungrateful of her to have a secret feeling that the Helstone vicarage and even the little house in Milton were much more like her idea of 'home'.

	Just as she was starting to feel bored, Edith came downstairs and the normal life of the household began again. As she used to do, Margaret answered her cousin's notes for her and reminded her of her social engagements. She loved playing with Sholto, Edith's little boy, and looked after both children while the servants had lunch. But because her father had died so recently, she was not yet able to go out socially, and while the rest of the family went out almost every day, she was often left alone. Then her thoughts returned to Milton and she compared her life there with her comfortable life in Harley Street. She was becoming bored and was afraid that she would forget that there was a world of servants and workers, with all their hopes and fears. There seemed to be an emptiness in her life now. When she suggested this to Edith, her cousin stroked her cheek and said, 'Poor child! Soon, when Henry returns from his travels, we will start having dinner parties again, and you will feel more cheerful, poor darling!' But Margaret did not feel that dinner parties were the answer to her problems.

	Dixon was still in Milton and Margaret missed her greatly. She read the servant's letters eagerly, hoping for news of friends. Dixon mentioned Mr Thornton quite frequently, as he often gave her advice about the Hales' business affairs. Then, at the end of June, when the house in Milton had been sold, she came to London in her new role as Margaret's servant. She brought a lot of Milton gossip with her. Fanny Thornton had got married and had had a very grand wedding, paid for by her brother. Dixon had organised a sale of furniture, and Mrs Thornton had bought several pieces and paid too little, while Mr Thornton had bought others and paid too much. She did not have much to say about the Higgins family but believed that Nicholas was well. She had heard that Mary had gone to work at Mr Thornton's mill as a cook, which sounded strange to her - why did the mill need a cook?

	Henry Lennox, who had been doing legal work in another part of the country, returned to London and, as he had done in the past, spent a lot of time in Harley Street. He seemed even cleverer than before, although Margaret thought he had become colder. But the two shared similar intellectual interests, and unlike Edith and the Captain, they enjoyed discussing a variety of subjects. Indeed, Margaret suspected that Mr Lennox felt slightly contemptuous of his brother and sister-in-law and their aimless way of life. He and Margaret often saw each other, but always in the presence of others, and this helped them to relax and forget their embarrassment. Margaret suspected that Mr Lennox tried to avoid being alone with her. But when he had made a particularly clever remark, she noticed that he would glance at her as if he wanted to know what she thought of it.

	Mr Bell wrote frequently, and in August Margaret received a letter from him saying that he would visit her the following week. For several months he had been complaining that he felt unwell, and some days before his visit, he wrote to say that he would come on Wednesday instead of Monday. But on Wednesday he did not appear, and the next morning a letter arrived from his servant explaining that Mr Bell had postponed his visit because he had suddenly felt ill. Then, at the time that he was supposed to leave for London, he had suffered a heart attack, and the doctors did not think he would survive the night.

	Margaret received this letter at breakfast time and her face went very pale as she read it; she silently put the letter into Edith's hands and left the room. Her cousin was very shocked by the news and started to cry, but when she had recovered a little, she went upstairs and found Dixon packing a small case.

	Margaret, who was putting on her hat, was sobbing, her hands trembling so much that she could hardly tie the strings.

	It was quickly agreed that Captain Lennox would accompany her to Oxford, and before midday the two were sitting in a train carriage. They arrived at Mr Bell's house and learned that he had died during the night. The news could not have been worse, but Margaret was glad that she was able to see the room where her father had died, and that she could say a quiet goodbye to the cheerful old man who had loved her so much.

	Captain Lennox fell asleep on the journey home and Margaret spent the time crying and thinking of how, in the last year, she had lost her mother, her father, and now Mr Bell. It seemed too much to bear, but then she arrived in Harley Street and Edith and her aunt were so kind and gentle, and little Sholto was so happy to see her, that she began to feel better. And by the time she went up to bed, she was able to thank God that her dear old friend had suffered so little.

	'Will Margaret inherit Mr Bell's money?' whispered Edith to her husband when she was alone with him that night.

	The Captain, however, had no idea, and did not think that Mr Bell had much money at all. Edith was disappointed to hear this, but a week later she came dancing towards her husband and said, 'I am right and you are wrong, sir. Margaret has had a lawyer's letter and she will inherit about 2,000 pounds, and also Mr Bell's property in Milton, which is worth about 40,000.'

	'She will be a rich woman! And what does she say about it?'

	'Oh, she has known about it for some months, apparently, but had no idea it was so much. She says she is afraid of the money. But that's nonsense and she'll soon get used to it.'

	It seemed natural that Henry Lennox would be Margaret's legal adviser, and he often came to her with papers that needed signing.

	'Henry,' said Edith one day, with a little smile, 'do you know how I expect your long conversations with Margaret to end?'

	'No, I don't,' he said, reddening. 'And I don't wish you to tell me. What you are thinking of may or may not happen. Please don't say anything to Margaret. She has been quite cool to me for a long time and is only just beginning to be kind.'

	Autumn came and the family went on holiday to Cromer, a pretty town on the east coast. Margaret's troubles had made her quite weak, and the fresh sea air was just what she needed. She spent long hours sitting on the beach, and the gentle sound of the waves, and the beauty of the sea and sky, calmed her spirit. While Aunt Shaw went shopping and Edith and Captain Lennox went horse-riding, Margaret thought about her time in Milton. Her greatest regret was that Mr Thornton had never learnt the truth about why she had lied. But slowly she began to realise that she had a future, and her face, which had looked so pale and tight with pain, began to change.

	After three weeks Henry Lennox, who had been in Scotland on business, came to join them, and he immediately noticed the difference in Margaret.

	'The sea has done Miss Hale a lot of good,' he said one afternoon, when she had left the room. 'She looks ten years younger than she did in Harley Street.'

	'It's the hat I got her,' said Edith delightedly. 'I knew it would suit her the moment I saw it.'

	'I'm sorry,' said Mr Lennox, 'but I believe I know the difference between a pretty dress and a pretty woman. No hat could make Miss Hale's eyes so bright or her lips so red. Her face is full of peace and light. She is even more beautiful than...' he lowered his voice, 'the Margaret Hale of Helstone.'

	From this time, the clever and ambitious man used all his powers to will Margaret. He loved her intelligent mind and her sweet beauty, and saw the money she had inherited as only one part of her, although it could help him in his career.

	On his way back down from Scotland, he had visited Milton on business connected with Margaret, and it was clear to him that her property there was increasing in value. He was glad that in their new relationship of client and legal adviser, he had many opportunities to talk to her. Margaret was very willing to listen, providing he talked about Milton, and she was delighted that he admired its inhabitants almost more than she did. He praised their energy and their courage, and noticed that when Margaret got bored, if he mentioned Milton her eyes would brighten and she would smile warmly at him.

	During her long hours of thinking on the beach, Margaret had realised that her life was her responsibility and no one else's. The result was that when the family returned to London, she told her aunt that she wanted to visit the poor and sick, as she had done in Helstone. Mrs Shaw did not wish to allow this at first, but Margaret was so sweetly persuasive that eventually she agreed. In their private conversations, Edith, Captain Lennox and Mrs Shaw decided that it would be helpful to Henry if Margaret did not go out much socially; Margaret had other admirers but her lack of interest in them was very obvious. They had noticed that Henry was the only man she really enjoyed talking to; and slowly, the two became closer to each other.



	Chapter fourteen

	Meeting Again

	Meanwhile, in Milton, Mr Thornton's financial troubles were growing more and more serious. The strike, more than a year and a half ago, had meant that he was unable to complete some of his business contracts. What made things worse was that in recent months, the commercial value of cotton had fallen. Mr Thornton's business was very badly affected and he had spent a lot of money on expensive new machinery, with the result that now he did not have money when he needed it. No new orders were coming in, and meanwhile there were the huge expenses of paying the workers and maintaining the mill.

	Mr Thornton did not despair, however. He was as calm and gentle to the women in his home as he had always been. He did not say much to his workers, but they understood his situation and were sympathetic. His relationship with them had changed greatly. Previously, his only ambition had been to be head of a firm that was known and respected all over the world. Now, he often talked to the workers, particularly Higgins, and listened to what they had to say. These conversations had made him realise that people everywhere were connected by the same human feelings. He had begun to see that, as a manufacturer, he was in a position to help and influence those less fortunate than him; he had even arranged to send the older Boucher children to school. Now, though, it seemed that he might lose this position, just as he was beginning to understand it!

	One afternoon, as Mr Thornton was walking down Marlborough Street, absorbed in his thoughts, Higgins approached him. Noticing that the mill owner was looking even gloomier than usual, Higgins tried to think of something to cheer him up.

	'Have you heard any news of Miss Margaret lately?' he asked.

	'Miss - who?' replied Mr Thornton.

	'Miss Margaret - Miss Hale, the clergyman's daughter.'

	'Oh, Miss Hale!' Suddenly the worried look left Mr Thornton's face and he smiled warmly. 'I'm her tenant now, you know, Higgins. I hear about her from her lawyer every now and then. She's well and living with friends - thank you, Higgins.'

	'Will she be coming to Milton again?'

	'No.'

	Higgins came closer to Mr Thornton and said in a low tone, 'How is the young gentleman?' Seeing that the mill owner did not seem to understand, he continued, 'The young gentleman - I mean Frederick, her brother who came to Milton.'

	'He came to Milton!'

	'Yes, when their mother died. Don't be afraid I'll tell anyone. Mary told me. She found out about it when she was working at the house.'

	'And he was here? It was her brother?'

	'Yes. I thought you knew all about it or I would never have said anything. I won't say another word.'

	The conversation ended and Mr Thornton continued on his way, saying to himself, 'It was her brother. I am so glad. I may never see her again, but it is a relief to know that. I knew she could never have done anything wrong. But I needed to be sure. I am so glad.'

	This news was a little golden thread in his fortunes. Several American firms that he did business with had failed and his financial situation was becoming more and more gloomy. Night after night Mr Thornton took his papers into his office and sat there long after his mother had gone to bed. One morning, when the first light of day was beginning to creep into the room, he realised that nothing could be done; he would have to give up the business that he had worked so hard to make a success.

	One hot summer evening, Edith came into Margaret's room, dressed for dinner.

	'Margaret, I need to talk to you! Henry has come to me and asked me if a Mr Thornton of Milton - your tenant, you know - can join our dinner party tonight. It is such a nuisance; the arrangements were perfect, and now they must be changed.'

	'I won't have dinner tonight. I don't want any,' said Margaret in a low voice. 'Dixon can bring me a cup of tea here. I will be really glad to lie down.'

	'You can't do that - we need you! Mr Colthurst, who is a Member of Parliament, is coming, and you know we planned for you to talk to him about Milton. Oh, I've just remembered, this Mr Thornton comes from Milton! How fortunate! Mr Colthurst is going to talk about the cotton industry in his next speech; he and Mr Thornton will have a lot to say to each other. Really, I think Henry has done very well. I asked him if Mr Thornton is a man one should be ashamed of. He said, "Not if you have any sense, little sister." So I suppose he can pronounce his h's.'

	'Did Mr Lennox say why Mr Thornton had come to London?' asked Margaret, her voice sounding rather tight.

	'Oh, his business has failed, or something like that. I'm sure Henry told you that, the day you had such a headache. Anyway, he has said that Mr Thornton has lost all his money, and deserves our respect, and I must be very polite to him. And as I have no idea how to do that, I need you to help me. And now come down with me, and rest on the sofa for half an hour.'

	Henry Lennox came early, and Margaret, blushing as she spoke, asked him some questions about Mr Thornton.

	'He can't afford to continue his payments for Marlborough Mills and the house, so he has come to discuss what can be done. I thought you would like him to come to the dinner party.'

	Mr Lennox had lowered his voice as he spoke to Margaret. Then, noticing that Mr Thornton had just entered, he jumped up and introduced him to Edith and Captain Lennox. Margaret watched Mr Thornton anxiously as he talked to them. She had not seen him for a long time and his circumstances had changed completely. Being tall and well-built, he looked as impressive as ever, but there were lines of worry on his face that had not been there before. Still, thought Margaret, he had nobleness and strength that made people respect him immediately.

	Mr Thornton's first glance around the room had shown him that Margaret was there. He had seen how carefully she listened to Mr Lennox, and came up to her with the calm, friendly manner of an old friend. She blushed, and the colour did not leave her cheeks for the rest of the evening. But she did not seem to have much to say to him, and when others approached her, he moved away and began talking to Mr Lennox.

	'Miss Hale is looking very well, is she not?' said Mr Lennox. 'I don't think Milton was very good for her. When she first came to London, I thought I had never seen anyone so changed. Tonight she is looking wonderful, and she is so much stronger now. Last autumn a two-mile walk made her tired. On Friday we walked for six miles at least.'

	'We? Who? Just the two of them?' wondered Mr Thornton.

	Dinner began, and during the meal Mr Colthurst, the Member of Parliament, heard enough of Mr Thornton's conversation to want to meet him. He asked Edith who the gentleman was, and when she told him that he was Mr Thornton of Milton, exclaimed 'Mr Thornton of Milton!', clearly recognising the name. Edith was pleased. Her dinner party was going well; Henry was being amusing, and Mr Thornton and Mr Colthurst were busy talking in a corner of the room. Margaret did not speak much, but was looking so beautiful that it did not matter. She was watching Mr Thornton's face and noticing the changes in him. He only smiled once, that brilliant smile that she remembered so well, and he glanced at her, almost as if he wanted her approval. But then his expression changed and he avoided looking at her again.

	After dinner, the ladies went upstairs, and Margaret, who did not feel like talking, started to do some sewing. The gentlemen soon followed, and as Mr Colthurst and Mr Thornton were standing near her, she was able to listen to their conversation.

	'My business has failed,' Mr Thornton said, 'and I am looking for a position in Milton where I can experiment with some ideas that I have.'

	'What experiments are these?' asked Mr Colthurst respectfully.

	'I now believe that an organisation can be much more successful if the employers and workers talk freely to one another and see each other as people. If an employer has a new plan, the workers may not realise how carefully he has thought about it. But if he discusses it with his workers, they will feel they are part of it and will want it to be successful.'

	'And you think this may prevent strikes?'

	'Not at all. But it might mean that the strikers aren't so bitter and so full of hatred.'

	Suddenly, Mr Thornton turned and walked up to Margaret, as if he knew she was listening.

	'Miss Hale,' he said, 'I had a letter from some of my men saying that they wished to work for me if I was ever in a position to employ them again. That was good, wasn't it?'

	'Yes, how wonderful! I am so glad,' said Margaret. She looked straight at him with her expressive eyes, then looked down when he looked back at her.

	He gazed at her for about a minute, as if he did not know what to say next. Then he sighed and said, 'I knew you would be pleased,' and turned away and did not speak to her again until he wished her good night very formally.

	As Mr Lennox was leaving, Margaret said hesitantly, 'Can I speak to you tomorrow? I want your help about - something.'

	'Certainly. I will come at whatever time you wish. At eleven? I will see you then.'

	His eyes brightened with pleasure. How she was learning to depend on him! It seemed as if any day now, she would make her feelings about him clear, and then he could once again ask her to marry him.

	Edith moved around the house very quietly the next morning, as if any sudden noise would disturb the meeting that was taking place in the sitting-room. Two o'clock came, and Margaret and Mr Lennox still sat there behind closed doors. Then there was the sound of a man's footsteps running downstairs.

	Edith opened the sitting-room door.

	'Well, Henry?' she said.

	'Well what?' he said rather shortly.

	'Come in to lunch.'

	'No thank you, I can't. I've lost too much time here already.'

	'Then it's not all settled,' said Edith sadly.

	'No, not at all, if you mean what I think you mean. It will never happen, Edith, so give up thinking about it.'

	'If Margaret lived near me, it would be so nice for us all,' said Edith, who did not want Henry to give up hope. 'At the moment, I am always afraid she will go and live in Cadiz.'

	'I am certain that Miss Hale would not marry me. And I shall not ask her.'

	'Then what have you been talking about?'

	'Business matters.'

	'Oh, go away if that's all.'

	'I shall. I am coming again tomorrow, and bringing Mr Thornton with me, as he needs to talk to Miss Hale.'

	'Mr Thornton! Why?'

	'He is Miss Hale's tenant,' said Mr Lennox, turning away. 'And he can no longer afford to rent the mill.'

	No one ever knew why Mr Lennox did not keep his appointment the following day. Mr Thornton arrived punctually; after he had waited for nearly an hour, Margaret came in looking very white and anxious.

	'I am so sorry Mr Lennox is not here,' she said hurriedly. 'He could have done it so much better. He is my adviser in this

	'I am sorry if it worries you. Shall I try to find him?'

	'No, thank you. I wanted to tell you how sorry I am that I am going to lose you as a tenant. But Mr Lennox has told me that he feels sure you will regain your former position. Please don't speak until I have finished.'

	Margaret turned over some papers in a trembling, hurried manner, and continued, 'Oh, here it is! He has written a document showing that if you would borrow some money of mine, about 18,000 pounds that is lying unused in the bank, you could pay me better interest than I have now, and Marlborough Mills could continue.'

	Mr Thornton did not speak and she went on looking for some papers, as if she was very anxious that he would see the arrangement as being advantageous for her. But her heart almost seemed to stop beating when Mr Thornton said, in a voice that trembled with passion, 'Margaret!'

	She looked up and then tried to hide her expressive eyes by hiding her head in her hands. He came nearer, and said her name again in the same passionate way.

	Her head sank even lower. He came close to her and knelt by her side, and whispered, 'Be careful. If you do not speak, I shall claim you as my own. Send me away at once, if I must go. Margaret!'

	She turned and laid his head on her shoulder, still with her face in her hands. It was delicious for him to feel her soft cheek against him. He held her close, but they did not speak. Finally, she whispered, 'Oh, Mr Thornton, I am not good enough!'

	'Not good enough! It is I who am not good enough.'

	After a minute or two, he gently removed her hands from her face, and put her arms around his shoulders, as they had been on the day of the riot.

	'Do you remember, love?' he asked.

	'Yes, and I remember how cruel I was to you the next day.'

	'Lift your head. I have something to show you.'

	Blushing, she raised her head.

	'Do you recognise these roses?' he asked, taking some dead flowers out of a book that he had with him.

	'No!' she replied. 'Did I give them to you?'

	'No, you did not. But you have probably worn roses like these.'

	She looked at them, thought for a minute, then smiled a little and said, 'They are from Helstone, are they not? Oh, have you been there? When did you go?'

	'I wanted to see the place where Margaret grew up, even when I had no hope of winning you. I went there after I returned from France.'

	'You must give them to me,' she said, trying to take them out of his hand.

	'You may have them, but you must pay me for them.'

	'How can I ever tell Aunt Shaw?' she whispered, after some minutes of delicious silence.

	'Let me speak to her.'

	'Oh, no, I should tell her. But what will she say?'

	'I can guess. She will exclaim, "That man!".'

	'Be careful,' said Margaret, 'or I will imitate the way your mother will say, "That woman!".'



	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	CHAPTER ONE

	The Bennets

	It is, of course, generally accepted that a wealthy single man must be in search of a wife. As soon as such a man moves into a neighbourhood, each of the families that live there will, without any inquiry as to his own feelings on the subject, immediately consider him the rightful property of one of their daughters.

	'My dear Mr Bennet,' said Mrs Bennet to her husband one day, 'have you heard that Netherfield Park has been rented at last?'

	Mr Bennet replied that he had not.

	'But it has,' she repeated. 'Mrs Long has just been here, and she told me all about it.'

	Mr Bennet made no answer.

	'Do you not want to know who has taken it?' cried his wife impatiently.

	'You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.'

	This was quite enough encouragement.

	'Well, my dear, Mrs Long says that Netherfield has been taken by a rich young man from the north of England, that he came down on Monday to see the place and was so pleased with it that he agreed to take possession immediately, and that some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of the week.'

	'What is his name?'

	'Bingley.'

	'Is he married or single?'

	'Oh, single, my dear! An unmarried man of large fortune - four or five thousand pounds a year. What a fine thing for our girls!'

	'And why is that? What difference does it make to them?'

	'My dear Mr Bennet,' replied his wife, 'how can you be so annoying? You must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.'

	'Is that his intention in settling here?'

	'Intention? Nonsense, how can you talk like that! But it is likely that he may fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes.'

	'I see no reason for that. You and the girls may go, or, even better, you may send them by themselves, because as you are as good-looking as any of them, Mr Bingley might like you the best of the party.'

	'My dear, you praise me too highly. I certainly have had my share of beauty, but when a woman has five grown-up daughters, she ought to give up thinking of her own appearance. But you must go and see Mr Bingley when he comes.'

	'I cannot promise to do so.'

	'But consider your daughters. You must go, because it will be impossible for us to visit him if you do not.'

	'You are too anxious to do what is proper, surely. I dare say Mr Bingley will be very glad to see you, and I will send him a few words by you to inform him of my complete agreement to his marrying whichever of the girls he chooses, though I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.'

	'I hope you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the others, but you are always showing a preference for her.'

	'They have none of them much about them to admire,' he replied. 'They are all silly and empty-headed like other girls, but Lizzy is a little more intelligent than her sisters.'

	'Mr Bennet, how can you speak of your own daughters in such a way? You take pleasure in annoying me. You have no pity on my poor nerves.'

	'You are mistaken, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They are my old friends. I have been listening to news of them for the last 20 years.'

	'Ah! You do not know how I suffer.'

	Mr Bennet was such a strange mixture of cleverness, sharp humour, silence and unexpected changes of mind, that the experience of 23 years had not been long enough to make his wife understand his character. Her mind was less difficult to understand. She was a foolish woman. When she was anxious, she imagined herself to be ill. The business of her life was to get her daughters married; its pleasure was visiting and news.



	CHAPTER TWO

	New Neighbours at Netherfield

	Mr Bennet was among the first of those who visited Mr Bingley. He had always intended to do so, though he continued to let his wife believe that he would not go. He finally made his intentions known in the following way.

	Watching his second daughter occupied in sewing a coloured band around a hat, he suddenly addressed her with:

	'I hope Mr Bingley will like it, Lizzy.'

	'We are not in a position to know what Mr Bingley likes,' said her mother bitterly, 'if we are not to visit him.'

	'But you forget, mother,' said Elizabeth, 'that we shall meet him at the public balls, and that Mrs Long has promised to introduce him.'

	'I do not believe Mrs Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces of her own. She is a selfish, insincere woman, and I have no opinion of her.'

	'Neither have I,' said Mr Bennet, 'and I am glad to find that you do not depend on her serving you.'

	Mrs Bennet would not make any reply, but, unable to control her annoyance, began complaining to one of her daughters.

	'Don't keep coughing so, Kitty! Have a little pity on my poor nerves.'

	'Kitty lacks judgment in her coughs,' said her father. 'She chooses the wrong moment.'

	'I do not cough for my own amusement,' replied Kitty. 'When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?'

	'In two weeks from tomorrow.'

	'So it is,' cried her mother 'I and Mrs Long does not come back until the day before, so it will be impossible for her to introduce him, because she will not know him herself.'

	'Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce Mr Bingley to her!'

	'Impossible, Mr Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him myself. How can you be so annoying!'

	'Well, if you will not perform this duty, I will do it myself.'

	The girls looked at their father. Mrs Bennet said: 'Nonsense, nonsense! I am sick of Mr Bingley'

	'I am sorry to hear that, but why did you not tell me so before? If I had known it this morning, I certainly would not have gone to see him. It is very unlucky, but as I have actually paid the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now.'

	The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished, that of Mrs Bennet being perhaps beyond the rest, though when the first excitement was over, she began to say that it was what she had expected all the time.

	'How good it was of you! I was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! And it is such a good joke, too, that you went this morning, and never said a word about it until now.'

	'Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,' said Mr Bennet, as he left the room, having had enough of his wife's talk.

	'What an excellent father you have, girls,' she said, when the door was shut. 'I do not know how you will ever repay him for his kindness. At our time of life, it is not so pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day, but for our dear daughters we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you are the youngest, I dare say Mr Bingley will dance with you at the next ball.'

	'Oh,' said Lydia confidently, 'I am not afraid. Though I am the youngest, I'm the tallest.'

	The rest of the evening was spent discussing how soon Mr Bingley would return Mr Bennet's visit, and deciding when they should ask him to dinner.

	All that Mrs Bennet, together with her five daughters, could ask on the subject, was not enough to draw from her husband any satisfactory description of Mr Bingley. They were forced at last to accept the second-hand information of their neighbour, Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. He was quite young, very good-looking, extremely agreeable, and, in addition to all this, he planned to be at the next public ball. Nothing could be more exciting!

	In a few days Mr Bingley returned Mr Bennet's visit, and sat for about ten minutes with him in the library. He had hoped to see the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard a great deal, but he saw only the father. The ladies were more fortunate. They had the advantage of observing, from an upstairs window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.

	An invitation to dinner was sent soon after, and Mrs Bennet had already planned the meal that was to show the quality of her housekeeping, when an answer arrived which changed everything. Mr Bingley found it necessary to be in London the following day, and was therefore unable to accept the honour of their invitation. Mrs Bennet was both disappointed and worried. She began to fear that he might always be flying about from one place to another, and never settled in Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quietened her fears a little by spreading the word that he had gone to London only to collect a large party for the ball, and a report soon followed that Mr Bingley would bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him. The girls were unhappy at the thought of such a large number of ladies, but were comforted to find, when the party entered the ballroom, that it was in fact made up of only five altogether: Mr Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the older one, and another young man.

	Mr Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanly. His sisters were fine women dressed in the latest fashions. His sister's husband, Mr Hurst, simply looked like the gentleman he was, but Mr Darcy soon drew the attention of everyone by his fine tall form, noble face, and the report, which was passed round the room within five minutes of his entrance, that he had an income of ten thousand pounds a year. He was looked at with admiration for half the evening, until his manners caused a general disgust which ended his popularity.

	Mr Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the important people in the room. He danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at Netherfield. What a difference between himself and his friend! Mr Darcy danced only once with Mrs Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, refused to be introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening walking around the room. Mrs Bennet's dislike of his behaviour was sharpened by his having made one of her daughters appear neglected.

	Elizabeth Bennet had been forced, by the small number of gentlemen, to sit out for two dances, and during part of that time Mr Darcy had been standing near enough for her to hear, against her will, a conversation between him and Mr Bingley, who left the dancing for a few minutes to urge his friend to join in.

	'Come, Darcy,' he said, 'I hate to see you standing around by yourself like this. You really should be dancing.'

	'I certainly shall not. Both your sisters already have partners, and there is not another woman in the room with whom I would care to dance.'

	'I would not like to be so difficult to please as you are,' cried Bingley. 'I have never met with so many pleasant girls in my life.'

	'You are dancing with the only good-looking one,' said Mr Darcy, looking at the oldest Miss Bennet.

	'Oh, she is the most beautiful creature that I ever saw! But there is one of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very attractive and probably very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.'

	'Which do you mean?' Darcy asked. Turning round, he looked for a moment at Elizabeth, until, catching her eye, he looked away and coldly said: 'She is fairly pretty, but not good-looking enough.'

	He walked off, and Elizabeth remained with no very friendly feelings towards him. But she told the story with great spirit among her friends, because she had a playful nature and a strong sense of humour.

	The evening on the whole passed off pleasantly for all the family. Mrs Bennet had seen her oldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield party. Mr Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been an object of attention by his sisters. Jane was as much pleased by this as her mother, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth shared Jane's pleasure, as she always did. Lydia and Kitty had never been without partners, and Mary, the least pretty of the family, had heard herself praised to Miss Bingley as a skilled musician.

	They returned, therefore, in good spirits to Longbourn, the village in Hertfordshire where they lived, and of which they were the most important family.

	Within a short walk of Longbourn there lived a family with whom the Bennet's were especially friendly. Sir William Lucas had formerly been in trade in the town of Meryton, where he had made a fairly large fortune and risen to the honour of a title of rank. This honour had, perhaps, been felt too strongly. It had given him a disgust for his business and for his home in a small market town, and, leaving them both, he had moved with his family to a house about a mile from Meryton, which he called Lucas Lodge. But though proud of his rank, he was friendly and ready to help anyone who needed it. Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to Mrs Bennet. They had several children. The oldest of them, a sensible young woman of about twenty-seven, was Elizabeth's special friend.

	It was a time-honoured tradition for the Misses Lucas and the Misses Bennet to meet and talk after a ball, and so the following morning brought the former to Longbourn for that purpose.

	'You began the evening well, Charlotte,' said Mrs Bennet, with forced politeness, to Miss Lucas. 'You were Mr Bingley's first choice.'

	'Yes, but he seemed to like his second better.'

	'Oh, you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. Certainly that did seem as if he admired her. It does seem as if- but it may not lead to anything, you know.'

	'But Mr Darcy is not so worth listening to as his friend, is he?' said Charlotte. 'Poor Eliza! To be only just fairly pretty!'

	'I hope you will not put it into Lizzy's head to be annoyed by his rude treatment. He is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs Long told me last night that he sat next to her for half an hour without once opening his lips.'

	'Are you quite sure, madam? Is there not some mistake?' said Jane. 'I certainly saw Mr Darcy speaking to her.'

	'Yes, because she finally asked him how he liked Netherfield, and he could not help answering her, but she said he seemed very angry at being spoken to.'

	'Miss Bingley told me,' said Jane, 'that he never speaks much except among people he knows well. With them he is extremely agreeable.'

	'I do not believe a word of it, my dear.'

	'I do not mind his not talking to Mrs Long,' said Miss Lucas, 'but I wish he had danced with Eliza.'

	'Another time, Lizzy' said her mother,'I would not dance with him, if I were you.'

	'His pride,' said Miss Lucas, 'does not offend me so much as pride often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot be surprised that such a fine young man with family and fortune should think highly of himself.'

	'That is very true,' replied Eliza, 'and I could easily forgive his pride, if he had not wounded mine!



	CHAPTER THREE

	Jane Gains an Admirer

	The ladies of Longbourn soon visited those of Netherfield. The visit was formally returned. Miss Bennet's pleasing manners continued to win the approval of Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley, and though the mother was considered to be unbearable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to, a wish was expressed to be better acquainted with the two oldest. This attention was received by Jane with the greatest pleasure, but Elizabeth saw pride in their treatment of everybody, even her sister, and could not like them. But it was plain that their brother did admire Jane, and Elizabeth observed that Jane was giving way to the preference which she had begun to feel for him from the first, and was beginning to be very much in love.

	While Elizabeth was watching Mr Bingley's attentions to her sister, she did not realize that she herself was becoming an object of some interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr Darcy had at first hardly admitted her to be pretty; he had seen her without admiration at the ball, and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticize. But he had no sooner decided that no single part of her face was particularly attractive than he began to find that the whole was made uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. She was completely unconscious of this. To her, he was only the man who had made himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her attractive enough to dance with.

	He began to wish to know her better.

	One day, a large party was amusing itself at Sir William Lucas's. A number of young ladies, and two or three army officers, were occupied in dancing at one end of the room. Mr Darcy stood near them, and Sir William was trying to make conversation with him. As Elizabeth moved towards them at this moment, Sir William was struck with the idea of doing the polite thing, and called out to her:

	'My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing? Mr Darcy, you must allow me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is in front of you.' And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr Darcy, who, though extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she immediately pulled away, and said in some confusion to Sir William:

	'Sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. Please do not suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.'

	Mr Darcy, with great politeness, requested to be allowed the honour of her hand, but without success. Elizabeth was determined, and Sir William's attempt at persuasion met with no success.

	'You are such an excellent dancer, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to refuse me the happiness of seeing you, and though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to doing us this honour for one half-hour.'

	'Mr Darcy is all politeness,' said Elizabeth smiling. She turned away. Her refusal had not harmed her in the gentleman's opinion, and he thought of her with some admiration.

	***

	The village of Longbourn was only one mile from the town of Meryton - a most convenient distance for the young ladies, who usually went there three or four times a week to make a visit to an aunt, Mrs Philips, who was married to a lawyer, and to look at a hat shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family, Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions. They always managed to learn some news, and at present they were well supplied by the arrival of a regiment in the neighbourhood, which would remain for the whole winter. They could talk of nothing but officers.

	After listening one morning to their excited remarks on this subject, Mr Bennet sharply observed:

	'From all that I can understand from your manner of talking, you must be two of the silliest girls in the country.'

	Kitty was a little ashamed, and did not answer, but Lydia laughed loudly.

	'I am astonished, my dear,' said Mrs Bennet, 'that you should be so ready to think your own children silly. As a matter of fact, they are all very clever.'

	'This is the only point on which we do not agree.'

	Mrs Bennet was prevented from replying by the entrance of a servant with a note for Miss Bennet. It came from Netherfield. Mrs Bennet's eyes brightened with pleasure, and she called out eagerly, while her daughter read:

	'Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well, Jane, hurry up and tell us.'

	'It is from Miss Bingley,' said Jane, and then read it aloud:

	NETHERFIELD PARK 10th October

	My dear Jane,

	Will you be so kind as to come to dinner today with Louisa and me? We are all alone. Come as soon as you can on receiving this. My brother and the gentlemen are to have dinner with the officers.

	Yours ever, CAROLINE BINGLEY.

	'Having dinner out,' said Mrs Bennet, 'that is very unlucky.'

	'Can I have the carriage?' asked Jane.

	'No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to rain and then you must stay all night.'

	'That would be a good idea,' said Elizabeth, 'if you were sure that they would not offer to send her home.'

	'Oh, but the gentlemen will have used Mr Bingley's carriage to go to Meryton.'

	'I would much rather go in the carriage,' repeated Jane.

	'But, my dear, your father does not have enough horses. They are wanted on the farm.'

	Jane was therefore forced to go on horseback, and her mother followed her to the door with many cheerful wishes for bad weather. Her hopes were answered. Jane had not been gone long before it rained hard. Her sisters were anxious for her, but her mother was pleased. The rain continued the whole evening. Jane certainly could not come back.

	'This was a good idea of mine!' said Mrs Bennet.

	Breakfast was hardly over next morning when a servant from Netherfield brought a note for Elizabeth from Jane to say that she was unwell.

	'Well, my dear,' said Mr Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note out loud, 'if your daughter should have a dangerous attack of illness - if she should die - it will be a comfort to know that it was all the result of going after Mr Bingley, and following your orders.'

	'Oh, I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of little things like colds. They will take good care of her.'

	Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, decided to go to her sister. The carriage was not available, and as she did not ride a horse, walking was her only possible way.

	'How can you be so silly,' said her mother, 'in all this mud! You will not be fit to be seen when you get there.'

	'I shall be very fit to see Jane, which is all I want.'

	'We will go as far as Meryton with you,' offered Lydia and Kitty. Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off together.

	At Meryton they parted, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing field after field impatiently, and finding herself at last within sight of the house, with tired feet, dirty shoes, and a face bright with the warmth of exercise.

	Her appearance caused a great deal of surprise. Elizabeth guessed that Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley were scornful that she should walk 3 miles so early and in such weather. She was received, though, very politely, and in their brother's manner was something better than politeness - kindness and pleasure. Mr Darcy said very little. He was occupied with admiring the brightness that exercise had added to the colour in her face.

	Her sister Jane had hardly slept at all, and was feverish. The doctor came, advised her to return to bed, and promised some medicine. The fever increased, and her head ached badly.

	Elizabeth stayed with her until three o'clock, and then felt she must go. But Jane showed such disappointment at parting from her that Miss Bingley was forced to invite her to remain at Netherfield for the present, and Elizabeth thankfully accepted this offer. A servant was sent to Longbourn to tell the family of her stay and to bring back a supply of clothes.

	***

	At half past six, Elizabeth was called to dinner. Jane was not at all better. Mr Bingley's sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four times how sorry they were, how unpleasant it was to have a bad cold, and how very much they disliked being ill themselves, and then thought no more of the matter. Their lack of real feeling towards Jane, when she was not actually in their presence, brought back to Elizabeth all her original dislike of them.

	Their brother was in fact the only one whose anxiety for Jane seemed sincere. His attentions to Elizabeth herself were most pleasing, and they prevented her from feeling herself such an unwelcome guest as she believed she was considered to be by the others.

	When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began criticizing her as soon as she was out of the room. How poor her manners were - a mixture of pride and lack of good family. She had no powers of conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty. Mrs Hurst thought the same, and added:

	'There is nothing to admire in her except being an excellent walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really looked almost wild.'

	'She certainly did, Louisa. Her hair so untidy!'

	'Yes, and her skirt! I hope you saw her skirt, covered in mud.'

	'I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked extremely well when she came into the room this morning,' said Mr Bingley. 'Her dirty skirt quite escaped my notice. Her coming shows a concern for her sister that is very pleasing.'

	'I am afraid, Mr Darcy,' observed Miss Bingley, in a half- whisper, 'that this adventure has rather lessened your admiration for her fine eyes.'

	'Not at all,' he replied. 'They were brightened by the exercise.'

	A short pause followed this speech, and Mrs Hurst began again:

	'I am extremely fond of Jane Bennet. She is really a very sweet girl. I wish with all my heart that she were well settled. But with such parents, and such low relations, I am afraid there is no chance of it.'

	'It must greatly lessen her chance of marrying a man of good position,' replied Mr Darcy.

	Mr Bingley made no answer to this speech, but his sisters gave it their full agreement, and continued for some time to make fun of their dear friend's inferior relations.

	Elizabeth spent most of the night in her sister's room, and in the morning requested that a note be sent to Longbourn, asking her mother to visit Jane and form her own judgment on her condition. The note was immediately sent, and Mrs Bennet, with her two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after breakfast.

	If Mrs Bennet had found Jane in any real danger, she would have been very upset, but when she was satisfied that her illness was not serious, she had no wish for her immediate recovery, as her return to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being taken home; nor did the doctor, who arrived at about the same time, think it advisable.

	Mrs Bennet repeated her thanks to Mr Bingley for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr Bingley was eager that his two guests should remain, and forced his younger sister to be polite too. She did this duty, even if rather unwillingly, but Mrs Bennet was satisfied, and left soon after that.

	The day passed much as the day before had done. Jane was slowly recovering. In the evening, Elizabeth joined the company in the sitting room, and took up some needlework. Mr Darcy was writing a letter.

	When that business was over, he asked Miss Bingley and Elizabeth to play some music. Miss Bingley moved eagerly to the piano. After a polite request for Elizabeth to begin the performance, which Elizabeth refused with equal politeness, Miss Bingley seated herself.

	Mrs Hurst sang with her sister; and while they were employed in this, Elizabeth could not help noticing how frequently Mr Darcy's eyes fixed themselves on her. She could hardly imagine that she could be an object of admiration to so great a man, but it seemed even stranger that he should look at her so, because she knew he disliked her. She could only suppose that she drew his attention because there was something wrong about her. The supposition did not upset her; she liked him too little to care for his opinion.

	Soon after, as Miss Bingley began to play a lively Scottish tune, Mr Darcy, approaching Elizabeth, said to her:

	'Do you not feel a great desire, Miss Bennet, to seize such an opportunity for a dance?'

	She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some surprise at her silence.

	'Oh,' she said, 'I heard you before, but I could not decide immediately on what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say "Yes", so that you might have the pleasure of thinking badly of my taste, but I always enjoy defeating such intentions. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell you that I do not want to dance; and now, think badly of me if you dare.'

	'I do not dare.'

	Elizabeth, having rather expected to offend him, was astonished at his politeness, but there was a mixture of sweetness and intelligence in her manner that made it difficult for her to offend anybody. Darcy had never been so attracted to any woman as he was to her. He really believed that, if it were not for her inferior relations, he would be in some danger of falling in love.

	Miss Bingley saw, or thought she saw, enough to be jealous, and her anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane was increased by her desire to get rid of Elizabeth.

	As a result of an agreement between the two sisters, Elizabeth wrote the next morning to her mother to beg her to send the carriage for them during that day. Mrs Bennet sent them a reply that they could not possibly have it before Tuesday. But Elizabeth had decided that she could stay no longer, nor did she very much expect that she would be encouraged to. She urged Jane to borrow Mr Bingley's carriage immediately.

	The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were leaving so soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade the older Miss Bennet that it was not safe for her, but Jane was always able to be decisive when she believed herself to be right.

	It was welcome news to Mr Darcy. Elizabeth attracted him more than he wished. He decided to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape him. He kept steadily to his purpose, and hardly spoke to her through the whole of the day, and although they were at one time left by themselves for half an hour, he kept firmly to his book and would not even look at her.

	On the next morning, they left for home. They were not welcomed back very gladly by their mother, but their father was really happy to see them. The evening conversation had lost much of its liveliness, and most of its good sense, during the absence of Jane and Elizabeth.



	CHAPTER FOUR

	Mr Collins

	'I hope, my dear,' said Mr Bennet to his wife, as they were at breakfast the next morning, 'that you have ordered a good dinner today, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.'

	'Whom do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call, and I hope my dinners are good enough for her!

	'The person of whom I speak is a gentleman and a stranger.'

	Mrs Bennet's eyes brightened. 'A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr Bingley, I am sure! Why, Jane, you never mentioned a word about this! But - good heavens! How unlucky! There is not a bit offish to be got today! Lydia, my love, ring the bell. I must speak to the cook immediately.'

	'It is not Mr Bingley,' said her husband. 'It is a person whom I have never seen in the whole of my life.'

	This caused general astonishment, and he had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his wife and all five of his daughters at once.

	After amusing himself for some time by not answering their questions, he explained:

	'A short time ago I received a letter. It was from my cousin, Mr Collins, who, when I am dead, may put you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.'

	Mr Bennet's property was, unfortunately for his daughters, to pass by law after his death to his nearest male relative, a distant cousin.

	'Oh, my dear,' cried his wife, 'I cannot bear to hear that mentioned. Please do not talk of that hateful man.' It was a subject on which she could never see reason.

	'But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself:

	HUNSFORD PARSONAGE NEAR WESTERHAM,

	KENT 15th October

	Dear Sir,

	The disagreement that existed between yourself and my honoured father always caused me much anxiety, and since his death I have frequently wished for a renewal of friendship between our two branches of the family.

	My mind is now made up on the subject. I have recently become a minister of the church and I have been fortunate enough to become the object of attention of the Lady Catherine de Bourgh. By her generosity I have been presented with a valuable position in this area, where I shall try to behave with grateful respect towards her.

	As a churchman, I feel it to be my duty to encourage peace among all families within my influence, and for these reasons I consider that my offer of friendship is deserving of praise, and that the fact that I am heir to your property will be kindly forgiven by you.

	I am troubled at being the means of harming your daughters, and beg to apologize for it, as well as to inform you of my readiness to do what is in my power to lessen the wrong done to them.

	If you have no objection to receiving me into your house, I intend to visit you and your family on Monday next week, at four o'clock, and would be thankful to remain as your guest until the Saturday of the following week.

	I remain, dear sir, with respectful greetings to your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend, WILLIAM COLLINS.

	'At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,' said Mr Bennet, as he folded up the letter. 'He seems a most dutiful and polite young man.'

	'There is some sense in what he says about trying to lessen the harm done to the girls,' his wife agreed.

	'Though it is difficult,' said Jane, 'to guess in what way he intends to do so.'

	Elizabeth was chiefly struck with his high degree of respect for Lady Catherine. As for her mother, Mr Collins's letter had taken away much of her unfriendly feeling, and she prepared herself to see him with a calmness that astonished her husband and daughters.

	Mr Collins arrived on time, and was received with great politeness by the whole family. Mr Bennet said little, but the ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr Collins seemed very willing to do so himself. He was a tall, heavy-looking young man of about twenty-five. His manner was serious and his behaviour very formal. He had not been seated long before he began to offer his congratulations to Mrs Bennet on having such a fine family of daughters, and to admire their beauty. He added that he did not doubt that she would in time see them all well settled in marriage. This speech was not much to the taste of some of his hearers, but Mrs Bennet answered most readily:

	'You are very kind, sir, I am sure, and I wish with all my heart that it may be so, or they will be poor enough. These matters are settled in such a strange way.'

	'I am conscious, madam, of the injustice to your lovely daughters, but they may be sure that I have come prepared to admire them. At present I will say no more, but perhaps, when we are better acquainted...'

	He was interrupted by the announcement of dinner, and the girls smiled at each other. They were not the only objects of Mr Collins's admiration. The hall, the dining room, and all its furniture, were examined and highly praised, and his approval would have touched Mrs Bennet's heart, if she had not believed that he was viewing it all as his own future property. The dinner, too, in its turn, was much admired, and he begged to know which of his cousins had prepared the excellent meal. But here he was corrected by Mrs Bennet, who informed him rather sharply that they could very well afford to keep a good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged pardon for having displeased her. She replied in a softer voice that she was not at all offended, but he continued to apologize for about a quarter of an hour.

	After dinner, Mr Bennet thought it was time to have some conversation, with his guest. He therefore chose a subject on which he expected Mr Collins would be pleased to speak, and began by observing that he seemed very fortunate in receiving such an excellent living from Lady Catherine. Mr Bennet could not have thought of a better beginning. Mr Collins praised her loudly, expressing himself in an extremely respectful manner. By teatime his host had had enough, and was glad to take the young man into the sitting room and invite him to read to the ladies. Mr Collins readily agreed, and a book was produced, but at the sight of it he quickly stated, begging pardon, that he never read works of fiction. Kitty and Lydia looked at him in surprise. Other books were offered, and he chose a collection of writings on matters of religion. Lydia turned away as he opened the book, and before he had, in a dull voice, read three pages, she interrupted to speak to her mother. Her two oldest sisters urged her to hold her tongue, but Mr Collins, much offended, laid the book down.

	Mr Collins was not a sensible man, and neither education nor society had improved him much. He was too conscious of his own importance, and, at the same time, too afraid of giving offence, especially to those above him in rank.

	A fortunate chance had brought him to the attention of Lady Catherine de Bourgh, when the position at Hunsford became free. Having now a good house and a large enough income, he intended to marry. In ending the quarrel with the Longbourn family, he was thinking of a wife, as he meant to choose one of the daughters. This was his plan of lessening the wrong done to them by his being the heir to their father's property, and he thought it was an extremely generous one.

	His plan did not change on seeing them. Miss Jane Bennet's beautiful face soon attracted him, and for the first evening she was his settled choice. But the next morning caused a change, because in a quarter of an hour's private talk with Mrs Bennet before breakfast, he received a warning about the cousin whom he had fixed on. 'As to her younger daughters, she could not be sure, she could not answer immediately - but her oldest daughter, she must just mention, she felt it her duty to state, was likely to be very soon engaged to be married.'

	Mr Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth. It was done in a moment. Elizabeth, next to Jane both in birth and beauty, followed her as his choice as a matter of course.

	Mrs Bennet was pleased with this suggestion, and trusted that she might soon have two daughters married. The man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before now stood high in her regard.



	CHAPTER FIVE

	Mr Wickham

	Lydia intended to walk to Meryton that morning, and every sister except Mary, who preferred to read, agreed to go with her. Mr Collins was their companion, at the request of Mr Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him and have his library to himself because his cousin never stopped talking.

	The girls listened politely to his remarks until they entered Meryton. The attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be won by him. Their eyes were immediately wandering up the street in search of the officers.

	But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man whom they had never seen before. He was of a most gentlemanly appearance and was walking with an officer on the other side of the road. All were struck by the stranger's manner. Kitty and Lydia knew the officer, and decided to find out who his friend was. They led the way across the street, under pretence of wanting something in a shop opposite, and had just reached the pathway when the two gentlemen arrived at the same place. Mr Denny, the officer, addressed them directly and introduced his friend, Mr Wickham, who had just joined the army.

	The young man appeared very pleasant. He was good-looking and he had a fine figure and very pleasing manners. The whole party was still having a pleasant conversation, when the sound of horses drew their attention, and Darcy and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On recognizing the ladies in the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual polite greetings. Bingley was the chief speaker, and Miss Jane Bennet the chief object. He was then, he said, on his way to Longbourn to inquire after her health. Mr Darcy followed him, and was beginning to decide to keep his eyes away from Elizabeth, when they suddenly became fixed on the stranger. Elizabeth happened to see the faces of both when they looked at each other, and was astonished at the effect of the meeting. The face of one became white, the other turned red. Mr Wickham, after a few moments, touched his hat in greeting, but Mr Darcy seemed hardly to move a finger in return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to imagine, and it was impossible not to want to know the reason for this behaviour.

	In another minute, Mr Bingley, who seemed not to have noticed what had happened, said goodbye to the ladies and rode on with his friend.

	As they walked home, Elizabeth described to Jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen, but Jane could no more explain such behaviour than her sister.

	***

	At Meryton the young people had accepted an invitation from their aunt to supper and cards. The carriage took Mr Collins and his five cousins at a suitable hour to the town, and the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the sitting room, that Mr Wickham had accepted an invitation from their uncle to be present, and was already in the house.

	When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr Collins was free to look around him and talk. To the girls the time of waiting appeared very long, but it was over at last. The gentlemen joined them, and when Mr Wickham walked into the room, Elizabeth felt that she had not been thinking of him with at all unreasonable admiration.

	Mr Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every lady's eye was turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he seated himself at last. With such fine men as Mr Wickham and the officers in competition for the attention of the ladies, Mr Collins seemed to sink into unimportance, but he still had from time to time a kind listener in Mrs Philips.

	Elizabeth was very willing to hear Mr Wickham talk, though she could not hope to be told what she chiefly wished to hear - the history of his acquaintance with Mr Darcy. But her interest was most unexpectedly satisfied. Mr Wickham began the subject himself. He asked slowly how long Mr Darcy had been staying in the area.

	'About a month,' said Elizabeth, and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, she added: 'He is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I believe.'

	'Yes,' replied Wickham, 'Pemberley, his property there, is a noble one - at least ten thousand a year. You could not have met with a person better able to give you information about it than myself. I have been connected with his family since my birth.'

	Elizabeth could not help looking surprised.

	'You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such a statement, after seeing the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. Do you know Mr Darcy well?'

	'Quite as well as I ever wish to do,' cried Elizabeth warmly. 'I have spent several days in the same house with him, and I find him very disagreeable.'

	'I cannot pretend to be sorry,' said Wickham, after a short pause. 'His behaviour to me has been shameful. I could have forgiven him anything, though, except for his disappointing the hopes of his father and bringing shame on his memory.'

	Elizabeths' interest in the subject increased.

	'I was educated for the Church,' continued Mr Wickham,' and Mr Darcy's father left me, on his death, the best living to which he had the power to make an appointment, as soon as it became free. He was my godfather and he was very fond of me. He thought that he had provided for my future, but the living was given to somebody else.'

	'Good heavens!' said Elizabeth. 'But surely that was against the law?'

	'My godfathers wishes were not expressed clearly. Mr Darcy treated his father's words as a suggestion with certain conditions connected with it, and claimed that I had no right to the living because of some imagined wrongdoings of mine. But the fact is that he hates me.'

	'This is quite shameful! He deserves that the truth should be made public.'

	'Until I can forget his father, I can never be the means of shaming the son.'

	Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings.

	'We were born in the same place, and brought up together. My father managed the late Mr Darcy's affairs, and gave all his time to the care of his property.'

	'I am surprised that Mr Darcy's pride has not made him fairer to you. I should have thought that he would have been too proud to be dishonest.'

	'It is surprising,' replied Wickham, 'because his pride has often caused him to be generous, to give his money freely, to be an excellent host and a kind landowner, and to do good to the poor. He also has brotherly pride. He looks after his sister very well.'

	'What sort of a girl is Miss Darcy?'

	He shook his head. 'I wish I could call her likeable. But she is too much like her brother - very, very proud.'

	'I am astonished at Mr Darcy's friendship with Mr Bingley. How can Mr Bingley, who is so agreeable and friendly to everyone, like such a man? He cannot know what Mr Darcy is.'

	'Probably not. But Mr Darcy can please when he wishes. He can be a good companion if he thinks it worth taking the trouble. He is a very different man among those who are his equals in the world.'

	Mr Wickham's attention was caught a little later by Mr Collins mentioning the name of Lady Catherine de Bourgh. He asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relations were acquainted with the family.

	'You know, of course, that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy were sisters, and therefore she is aunt to the present Mr Darcy. Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is believed that she and her cousin will unite the two properties by marriage.'

	This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of Miss Bingley. All that lady's hopes would be disappointed, if he was already promised to another.



	CHAPTER SIX

	The Ball at Netherfield

	Elizabeth repeated to Jane, the next day, what had passed between Mr Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern. She could not believe that Mr Darcy could be so undeserving of Mr Bingley's friendship, but it was not in her nature to question the truthfulness of a young man of such pleasing appearance as Wickham.

	'They have both been mistaken, I expect,' she said, 'in some way or other, of which we can form no idea.'

	The two young ladies were called from the garden, where this conversation was taking place, by the arrival of some of the persons of whom they had been speaking. Mr Bingley and his sisters came to give their personal invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Tuesday. Miss Bingley and Mrs Hurst appeared very pleased to see their dear friend again, and complained that it was a long time since they had last met. They took very little notice of the rest of the family, avoiding Mrs Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the others.

	The thought of the Netherfield ball was exciting to every female of the family. Mrs Bennet considered it to be given as a mark of attention to her oldest daughter, and was particularly pleased at receiving the invitation from Mr Bingley himself, instead of by means of a formal card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends and the attentions of their brother, and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr Wickham. The happiness of Kitty and Lydia depended less on any special event or person. All that they wished for was plenty of partners. Even the serious-minded Mary was willing to go.

	Elizabeth's spirits were so high that though she did not often speak unnecessarily to Mr Collins, she could not help asking him whether he intended to accept Mr Bingley's invitation. To her surprise, he replied that he would go, and added:

	'I shall hope to be honoured in the dance with the hands of all my cousins in the course of the evening, and I take this opportunity of asking for yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the first two dances especially. I trust that my cousin Jane will understand the reasons for this preference, and not think that it is in any way disrespectful to her.'

	Elizabeth felt herself completely at a disadvantage. She had fully intended being promised to Wickham for those same dances, and to have Mr Collins instead! Her liveliness had never been expressed at a worse moment. But she could do nothing. Mr Collins's offer was accepted with as much pleasure as she could manage to show. It now first struck her, though, that she was chosen from among her sisters as being suitable in his opinion to be his wife at Hunsford Parsonage. The idea was soon strengthened as she observed his increasing politeness to her, and though she herself was more astonished than pleased, it was not long before her mother let her know that the possibility of their marriage was extremely pleasing to her. Elizabeth pretended not to understand her, because she knew very well that a serious argument would result from any reply. Mr Collins might never make the offer, and until he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.

	If there had not been a ball to get ready for and to talk about, the younger Misses Bennet would have been in a sad state at this time. From the day of the invitation to the day of the ball, continuous rain prevented them from walking to Meryton. No aunt, no officers, no news could be looked for. Even Elizabeth might have found some test of her patience in weather that delayed the development of her acquaintance with Mr Wickham, and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday and Monday bearable to Kitty and Lydia.

	***

	On the Tuesday evening, Elizabeth entered the sitting room at Netherfield, and looked without success for Mr Wickham among the group of officers present there. Until then, no doubt about him coming had entered her mind. She had dressed with more care than usual, and readied herself in the highest spirits to complete the winning of his heart. But in a moment the terrible thought came to her that he had been purposely left out of the Bingleys' invitation to the officers, for Mr Darcy's pleasure, and although this was not exactly the case, his friend Mr Denny told them that Wickham had had to go to London on business, and added:

	'I do not imagine that he would have gone just now, if he had not wished to avoid a certain gentleman here.'

	This information sharpened Elizabeth's feelings of displeasure against Mr Darcy, and although she tried to be cheerful, the first two dances brought a return of unhappiness. Mr Collins, serious and awkward, apologizing instead of paying attention, and often moving wrongly without being conscious of it, brought her all the shame and unhappiness which a disagreeable partner can give.

	She danced next with an officer. Then she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr Darcy, who took her so much by surprise in his request for her hand that, without knowing what she did, she accepted him.

	Elizabeth took her place in the set, astonished at the honour at which she had arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr Darcy, and seeing in the faces of her neighbours their equal astonishment. They spoke very little until they had finished the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not often walk to Meryton. She answered that this was so, and, unable to stop herself, added, 'When we met you the other day there, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.'

	The effect was immediate. The expression on his face became prouder than ever. At last he spoke:

	'Mr Wickham is fortunate enough to have such pleasing manners that he can always be sure of making friends. It is less certain that he is able to keep them.'

	'He has been unlucky enough to lose your friendship,' replied Elizabeth.

	Darcy made no answer, and seemed anxious to change the subject. At that moment Sir William Lucas appeared, and stopped to offer him a mark of attention.

	'My dear sir, such very high-class dancing is not often seen. I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially after a certain desirable event,' and he looked towards Jane and Mr Bingley. 'What congratulations will then flow in!'

	Sir William's mention of his friend seemed to strike Darcy with some force, and his eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancing together.

	When the dance was over, Miss Bingley came towards Elizabeth, and, with a look of scorn, addressed her as follows:

	'So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite pleased with George Wickham. But let me warn you not to trust what he says. The story that Mr Darcy has wronged him is completely untrue. He has always been kind to him, though Wickham treated him in a shameful manner. I do not know the details, but I do know that Mr Darcy is not to blame. I pity you, Miss Eliza, but really, considering his family, one could not expect much better.'

	'His guilt and his family appear, by your account, to be the same,' said Elizabeth angrily.

	'I beg your pardon,' replied Miss Bingley, turning away. 'My words were kindly meant.'

	Elizabeth then went in search of her oldest sister, who met her with a smile of such sweet satisfaction that Elizabeth immediately understood her feelings and forgot everything else for the moment in the hope that Jane was on the way to happiness. Jane began to talk about Mr Wickham. 'Mr Bingley does not know the whole of the history, but is sure that his friend has acted rightly and honourably. I am sorry to say that by his account Mr Wickham is not at all a respectable young man.'

	'Mr Bingley does not know Mr Wickham himself?'

	'No. He never saw him until the other morning at Meryton.'

	'This explanation, then, is what he has received from Mr Darcy. I am perfectly satisfied. Mr Bingley has defended his friend, but I shall continue to hold the same opinion.'

	She then changed the subject to one more pleasing to them both, and listened with pleasure to the happy hopes which Jane had of Mr Bingley's feelings towards her. When Mr Bingley himself joined them, Elizabeth moved away to Miss Lucas.

	Shortly afterwards, Mr Collins came up to them in a state of great excitement. He had discovered that Mr Darcy was a relative of Lady Catherine.

	'You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr Darcy?'

	'Of course I am.'

	Elizabeth tried hard to persuade him against this, warning him that Mr Darcy would consider it as a piece of impoliteness rather than as a mark of respect for his aunt.

	'Pardon me for neglecting to take advantage of your advice,' was his reply, 'but in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and study to decide on what is right than a young lady like yourself.' And, with that, he left her to approach Mr Darcy, whose astonishment was plain, and who replied with cold politeness.

	Elizabeth felt ashamed of her cousin, and turned her attention to the more pleasing subject of Jane's future. Her mother's thoughts were plainly of the same kind, and when they sat down to supper, Elizabeth was deeply annoyed to find that Mrs Bennet was talking loudly to Lady Lucas of nothing else but her expectations that Jane would soon be married to Mr Bingley. Elizabeth tried without success to control her mother's words, because she could see that they were heard by Mr Darcy, who sat opposite them. Nothing she could say had any effect. Elizabeth reddened with shame.

	When supper was over, singing was mentioned, and Elizabeth had the added discomfort of seeing Mary getting ready to entertain the company. Mary was the least pretty of the five sisters, so she had tried to make herself more attractive by becoming more able than the others, and was always eager to bring her musical skill to notice. But her powers were by no means fitted for this kind of performance. Her voice was weak, and her manner unnatural. Elizabeth listened with impatience. Mary sang twice, and Elizabeth could see Mr Bingley's sisters exchanging scornful smiles. She looked at her father, who understood and gently stopped his daughter.

	The rest of the evening brought Elizabeth little amusement. Mr Collins continued at her side and would not leave her alone. Mr Darcy took no more notice of her, even when he was standing near her.

	But Mrs Bennet left Netherfield perfectly satisfied. She was fully confident that she would see Jane married in the course of three or four months. She thought with equal certainty of having another daughter married to Mr Collins. She loved Elizabeth less than her other daughters, and she thought Mr Collins quite good enough for her.



	CHAPTER SEVEN

	Mr Collins Makes a Proposal of Marriage

	The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn: Mr Collins made a formal proposal of marriage. Having decided to do it without delay, and having no lack of self-confidence, he began in a very orderly manner with all the ceremony which he supposed to be a regular part of the business. On finding Mrs Bennet, Elizabeth and one of the younger girls together soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:

	'May I hope, madam, to speak privately with your lovely daughter Elizabeth?'

	Before Elizabeth had time to express her surprise, Mrs Bennet immediately answered:

	'Oh, yes, certainly. I am sure that Lizzy can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you upstairs.' And picking up her sewing, she was hurrying away, when Elizabeth called out:

	'I beg you not to go. Mr Collins must excuse me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am going away myself.'

	'No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are.' And when Elizabeth seemed about to escape, she added, 'Lizzy, you must stay and hear Mr Collins.'

	Elizabeth could not oppose such a command, and a moment's consideration made her realize that it would be better to get the matter settled, so she sat down again. Mrs Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Mr Collins began:

	'Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, your behaviour only adds to your other perfections. You would have been less pleasing in my eyes if there had not been this little unwillingness, but allow me to inform you that I have your respected mother's permission for this address. Almost as soon as I entered this house, I made you my choice as the companion of my future life. My reasons for marrying are, first, I think it a right thing for every church minister to set an example by doing so; secondly, I am sure that it will add very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly, Lady Catherine has advised it. As I am heir to this property on the death of your honoured father, I decided to choose my wife from among his daughters. I know very well that you have little fortune, but I shall never blame you for that when we are married.'

	It was necessary to stop him now.

	'You are in too much of a hurry, sir,' she cried. 'You forget that I have made no answer. Accept my thanks for the honour that you are showing me, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to refuse your proposal.'

	'I quite understand,' replied Mr Collins, with a wave of the hand, 'that it is usual for young ladies to refuse the man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he asks for the first time.'

	'On my honour, sir,' cried Elizabeth, 'I am perfectly serious in my refusal.'

	'When I next speak to you on this subject,' continued Mr Collins, 'I shall expect to receive a more favourable answer.'

	Elizabeth tried without success to make him believe her. He had too good an opinion of himself and his position, and he pointed out that she was too poor to receive many other offers. To this she could make no reply, and immediately, and in silence, left the room, with the intention of asking for her father's support.

	***

	Mrs Bennet had waited in the hall for the end of the conversation. As soon as she saw Elizabeth open the door and, with a quick step, pass her towards the stairway, she entered the breakfast room and congratulated both Mr Collins and herself. Mr Collins received and returned these good wishes, but when he went on to give details of his conversation with Elizabeth, the information astonished Mrs Bennet.

	'But you may depend on it, Mr Collins,' she added, 'that Lizzy shall be made to behave reasonably. I will speak to her myself immediately. She is a very foolish girl, and does not know her own interest, but I will make her know it. I will go to Mr Bennet, and we shall very soon settle the matter with her, I am sure.'

	She would not give him time to reply, but hurried immediately to her husband, and called out as she entered the library: 'Oh, Mr Bennet, you are wanted immediately. You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr Collins, because she swears she will not have him.'

	Mr Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least changed by her information.

	'I have not the pleasure of understanding you,' he said, when she had finished her speech. 'What are you talking about?'

	'Mr Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy says that she will not have Mr Collins, and if you do not hurry, he will change his mind and not have her!

	'And what am I to do about it? It seems a hopeless business.'

	'Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that she must marry him.'

	'Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.'

	Mrs Bennet rang the bell and Miss Elizabeth was sent for.

	'Come here, child,' said her father as she appeared. 'I have sent for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr Collins has made you an offer of marriage. Is it true?' Elizabeth replied that it was. 'Very well - and you have refused this offer of marriage?'

	'I have, sir.'

	'Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother demands that you accept it. Is it not so, Mrs Bennet?'

	'Yes, or I will never see her again.'

	'An unhappy choice is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you will be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you again if you do not marry Mr Collins, and I will never see you again if you do!

	Elizabeth could not help smiling at such an ending to such a beginning. Mrs Bennet, on the other hand, was extremely disappointed. She returned to the subject repeatedly, using both persuasion and threats to try and change her daughter's mind. Mr Collins himself remained silent and offended, unable to understand how his cousin could possibly refuse him.

	While the family were in this state, Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with them. Mr Collins's attentions were now turned to her, which Elizabeth found to be a great relief.



	CHAPTER EIGHT

	Netherfield Is Empty

	After breakfast the next day, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr Wickham had returned. He joined them as they entered the town, and went with them to their aunt's. He explained to Elizabeth his absence from the ball.

	'I found,' he said,' as the time approached, that I had better not meet Mr Darcy - that to be in his company might be more than I could bear.'

	Elizabeth highly approved of his good sense. As Wickham and another officer walked back with them to Longbourn, she was able to introduce him to her father and mother.

	Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet. It came from Netherfield, and was opened immediately. Elizabeth saw her sister's face change as she read it. But she soon controlled herself and, putting the letter away, tried to join in the conversation with her usual cheerfulness. But as soon as the officers had left, a look from Jane invited Elizabeth to follow her upstairs.

	When they had reached their own room, Jane, taking out the letter, said, 'This is from Caroline Bingley. What it contains has surprised me a great deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way to town, and without any intention of coming back again.'

	She then read the letter out loud. It spoke of the writer's sorrow at parting from Jane, and urged her to write frequently. Elizabeth judged this to be insincere. It stated that Mr Bingley had business in town, and would be in no hurry to leave it again.

	'It is clear from this that he will come back no more this winter,' said Jane.

	'It is clear that Miss Bingley does not intend that he should!

	Why do you think so? It must be his own decision. He is free to act as he wishes. But you do not know everything. I will read you the words that hurt me most. I will have no secrets from you.' The letter then told of the beauty of Mr Darcy's young sister, and of Mr Bingley's admiration for her, and of the family's hopes that they would marry.

	'Is it not clear enough? Does it not plainly state that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister, and that she believes that her brother does not care for me? She means - most kindly - to warn me. Can there be any other opinion on the subject?'

	'Yes, there can. Mine is totally different. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is in love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he does not care about you.'

	Jane shook her head.

	'Really, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you together can doubt his love. But the case is this - we are not rich enough or grand enough for them.'

	Elizabeth spoke comfortingly to her sister, and gradually persuaded her that Mr Bingley would return later and answer every wish of her heart. To their mother they decided only to announce that the Netherfield party had left for a short time.



	CHAPTER NINE

	Mr Collins Makes Another Proposal

	The Bennets were invited to dinner with the Lucases, and again, most of the time, Miss Lucas was kind enough to listen to Mr Collins. Elizabeth thanked her warmly, and Charlotte told her friend that she was glad to be of service to her. This was very helpful of her, but the real reason for Charlotte's kindness was something that Elizabeth had no idea of- a desire to attract Mr Collins herself. When they parted later that night, Charlotte would have felt almost certain of success if he had not been planning to leave Longbourn. But Mr Collins, wasting no time, escaped from the Bennets early next morning with great skill. Miss Lucas noticed him from an upper window as he walked towards her parents' house. She came down quickly to the garden, and there, meeting him as if by accident, received his proposal of marriage.

	Sir William and Lady Lucas were immediately asked for their agreement, which they willingly gave. Mr Collins's present position made it a good marriage for their daughter, to whom they could give little fortune, and in the future he would be Mr Bennets heir. Charlotte was fairly well satisfied. Mr Collins was neither sensible nor agreeable, but she, on the other hand, was twenty-seven, and with little chance of other offers.

	She decided to give the news to the Bennets herself, and therefore asked Mr Collins to say nothing when he returned to Longbourn, which he was leaving the next day.

	When Elizabeth was privately informed by Charlotte, her astonishment "was so great that she could not help crying out:

	'Engaged to be married to Mr Collins! My dear Charlotte, impossible!'

	'I see what you are feeling,' replied Charlotte. 'You must be surprised, very much surprised, as Mr Collins was so recently wanting to marry you. But I do not expect very much from marriage, you know. I shall be satisfied with having a comfortable home.'

	Elizabeth answered quietly and, after an awkward pause, they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much longer, and Elizabeth was left to think over what she had heard. The strangeness of Mr Collins's making two offers of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison with his being now accepted. She would never have expected Charlotte to give up her finer feelings to gain no more than comfort. She felt that her friend had shamed herself, and she did not believe it possible for her to be happy in the life she had chosen.

	As for Mrs Bennet, she was astonished and shocked by the news. A week passed before she could see Elizabeth without scolding her, and a month before she could speak to Sir William or Lady Lucas without being rude. Lady Lucas was not without pleasure in being able to talk to Mrs Bennet about the comfort of having a daughter well married, and she visited Longbourn rather more often than usual, to say how happy she was. Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was an awkwardness that kept them silent on the subject. Elizabeth felt that there could never be any real confidence between them again, and she turned with greater fondness to her sister Jane, for whose happiness she became daily more anxious.



	CHAPTER TEN

	Jane Goes to London

	Neither Jane nor Elizabeth was comfortable on the subject of Mr Bingley's continued absence. Even Elizabeth began to fear, not that Bingley's feelings had changed, but that his sisters and the amusements of London would be successful in keeping him away. Jane wished to hide her anxiety, and never mentioned it, but an hour rarely passed without some remark from her mother which it needed all Jane's patience to bear in silence.

	Mrs Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. She was continually thinking about why Mr Bingley had not returned. Then, too, the sight of Miss Lucas was hateful to her. She regarded her with jealous dislike as the wife of the future owner of Longbourn. Whenever Charlotte came to see them, Mrs Bennet imagined that she was thinking of the time when she would take possession.

	Jane had written to Miss Bingley, and in a little while a reply arrived and put an end to doubt. The first sentence announced that they were all settled in London for the winter, and the letter ended with her brother's sadness at not having had time to say goodbye to his friends before leaving.

	Hope was over, completely over. Elizabeth's heart was divided between sympathy for her sister and anger against the others. Secretly she blamed Mr Bingley for his weakness in being persuaded by his sisters, and she was angry because she believed that Mr Darcy had helped to influence him.

	Jane bore her sorrow with gentle sweetness, and tried to believe that she had only imagined Mr Bingley to be fond of her, and that she had only herself to blame.

	***

	On the following Monday, Mrs Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his wife, who came, as usual, from London to spend Christmas at Longbourn. Mr Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanly man, of much finer character than his sister, and Mrs Gardiner, who was several years younger than Mrs Bennet, was a pleasant, intelligent, well-dressed woman, and a great favourite with her nieces.

	The first part of Mrs Gardiner's business, on her arrival, was to give her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was done, she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen. Mrs Bennet had many troubles to tell, and much to complain of. Two of her girls had been on the point of marriage, but nothing had happened after all.

	'I do not blame Jane,' she continued, 'but Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard to think that she might have been Mr Collins's wife by this time, if it had not been for her own bad character! He made her an offer, here in this room, and she refused him. The result of all this is that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before I have. It is very bad for my nerves to be annoyed so by my own family. But your coming at this time is the greatest of comforts, and I am glad to hear about the new dresses.'

	When Mrs Gardiner was alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke on the subject of Jane.

	'Poor Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her character, she may not recover for some time from such a disappointment. But do you think that she could be persuaded to go back to town with us? A change of scene might be of help to her.'

	Elizabeth was extremely pleased with this proposal.

	'I hope,' added Mrs Gardiner, 'that no thought of this young man will influence her. We live in such a different part of the town, and mix with such a different class of society, that she is not likely to meet him, unless he really comes to see her.'

	Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure, and the Gardiners left Longbourn after a week's stay. Before she went, though, Mrs Gardiner, who guessed from Elizabeth's behaviour her feelings for Wickham, gave her a word of advice.

	'Seriously, I would advise you to be careful. I have nothing to say against him. He is a most interesting young man, and if he had the fortune that he ought to have, I should think that you could not do better. But as it is - you have sense, and we all expect you to use it. You must not disappoint your father.'

	***

	January and February were dull months. Elizabeth missed Jane sadly. Charlotte was married and had left for Hunsford. There was little except the walks to Meryton, sometimes muddy and sometimes cold, to help pass the time.

	Elizabeth wrote and received many letters. She exchanged news with Charlotte as regularly as ever, but their friendship could never be as close as it had been before. From London Jane wrote that she had neither seen nor heard anything of Miss Bingley. But she accounted for this by supposing that her last letter to her friend had by some accident been lost.

	'My aunt,' she continued, 'is going tomorrow into that part of the town, and I shall take the opportunity of visiting Caroline.'

	She wrote again after she had made the visit. 'I did not think that Caroline was in good spirits,' were her words, 'but she was glad to see me and cross that I had given her no notice of my coming to London. I was right, therefore. My last letter had never reached her. I inquired after her brother, of course. He is so busy in society that they hardly ever see him. My visit was not long, as Caroline and Mrs Hurst were going out.'

	Elizabeth shook her head over this letter.

	Four weeks passed, and Jane saw nothing of Mr Bingley. She could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley's inattention. At last the visitor did appear, but the shortness of her stay and the change in her manner no longer made it possible for Jane to deceive herself. It was plain that she received no pleasure from coming. She made a slight, formal apology for not visiting her before, said not a word about wishing to see her again, and was in every way so unfriendly that Jane decided not to continue the acquaintance.

	To Mrs Gardiner, Elizabeth wrote of her own affairs. Wickham's attentions to her were over, and he was now the admirer of Miss Mary King, a young lady whose grandfather had just died and left her ten thousand pounds. Elizabeth's heart had been only slightly touched, and her pride was satisfied with believing that she would have been his only choice, if fortune had permitted.



	CHAPTER ELEVEN

	Elizabeth Visits Hunsford

	In March, Elizabeth was visiting Hunsford, at Charlotte's invitation. She had not at first thought very seriously of going there, but she found that her friend was depending on the arrangement. Absence had increased her desire to see Charlotte again, and lessened her disgust for Mr Collins. The journey would also give her a moment with Jane as she would spend the night in London. She would travel with Sir William Lucas and his second daughter Maria.

	It was only 24 miles to London, and they began early so that they could arrive before midday. As they drove to Mr Gardiner's door, Jane was at a sitting room window watching for their arrival. When they entered the hall, she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking closely at her face, was pleased to see it as healthy and beautiful as ever. On the stairs was a crowd of little girls and boys, whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them to wait in the sitting room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her for a year, prevented them from coming down any further. All was joy and kindness. The day passed away most pleasantly, the afternoon in shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.

	During the performance, Elizabeth managed to sit by her aunt. Their first subject was her sister, and she was more troubled than surprised to hear that, though Jane struggled to be cheerful, there were times when she was very sad. It was reasonable, though, to hope that this would not continue for too long.

	Before they were separated by the end of the play, Elizabeth had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to go with her uncle and aunt on a tour which they planned to take in the summer.

	'We have not quite decided how far it will take us,' said Mrs Gardiner, 'but perhaps to the Lakes.'

	No plan could have been more welcome to Elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation was immediate and grateful.

	***

	Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to Elizabeth. When they left the main road for the smaller road to Hunsford, every eye was in search of the Parsonage. At last it appeared. Mr Collins and Charlotte were at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate among the smiles and greetings of the whole party. Mrs Collins welcomed her friend with the greatest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more pleased that she had come, as she found herself so warmly received.

	She could not help thinking, as Mr Collins proudly showed her his house and furniture, that he wished to make her feel what she had lost by refusing him. She was not able to please him, though, by any sign of unhappiness; instead she looked with surprise at her friend, who could appear so cheerful with such a companion. After admiring the house, they were invited by their host to take a walk in the garden. One of his chief pleasures was to work in the garden, and Elizabeth smiled to herself as she heard Charlotte talk of the healthiness of the exercise, and say that she encouraged it as much as possible.

	The house itself, though small, was neat and convenient, and when Mr Collins could be forgotten, there was a great feeling of comfort everywhere - and by Charlotte's enjoyment, which was quite plain, Elizabeth supposed he must often be forgotten.

	It was mentioned at dinner that Lady Catherine was still in the country. Mr Collins poured out his praises of her kind attentions to himself and Charlotte, and expressed the expectation that she would honour Elizabeth with her notice.

	The evening was spent chiefly in talking over the news from home, and when it had passed, Elizabeth, in the quietness of her own room, had to think over Charlotte's degree of satisfaction, to understand her skill in guiding her husband, and her self-control in managing to deal with him, and to admit that it was well done.

	At around the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise below showed the whole house to be in a state of excitement, and, after listening for a moment, Elizabeth heard somebody running upstairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly to her. She opened the door, and met Maria, who cried to her to come down that moment.

	Elizabeth asked questions without success. Maria would tell her nothing more, and they ran down to the dining room in search of the cause of her excitement. It was two ladies stopping in a carriage at the garden gate.

	'And is this all?' cried Elizabeth. 'I expected at least that the pigs had got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her daughter!'

	'My dear!' said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake. 'It is not Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs Jenkinson, who lives with them. The other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. Who would have thought she could be so thin and small!'

	'I like her appearance,' said Elizabeth, who was struck with other ideas. 'She looks weak and disagreeable. Yes, she will suit him very well. She will make him a very fitting wife.'



	CHAPTER TWELVE

	Lady Catherine de Bourgh

	The purpose of the ladies' visit had been to ask the whole party to dinner at Rosings, where Lady Catherine lived, and Mr Collins's proud excitement at this invitation was complete. Hardly anything else was talked of the whole day. Mr Collins carefully explained what they should expect, so that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and so excellent a dinner would not completely astonish them. While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their doors to urge them to be quick, as Lady Catherine very much objected to being kept waiting for dinner. Such accounts quite frightened Maria Lucas, who had been little used to society, but Elizabeth's courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady Catherine that filled her with respect for cleverness or goodness, and she thought that she could meet the grandness of money and rank without fear.

	Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the occasion when she was introduced to Lady Catherine, and was able to look at the three ladies in front of her calmly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly marked features. Her behaviour was not friendly, and her manner of receiving them did not allow her visitors to forget their inferior rank. Whatever she said was spoken in a commanding voice that expressed her belief in her own importance. Miss de Bourgh looked pale and weak, and spoke only in a low voice to Mrs Jenkinson.

	The dinner was extremely fine, and all was as Mr Collins had promised. His loud praises of everything were continually repeated by Sir William. Lady Catherine smiled at them, and seemed pleased by their extreme admiration.

	When the ladies returned to the sitting room, there was little to be done except listen to Lady Catherine talk, which she did without stopping, giving her opinion loudly on every subject in a manner that showed that she was not used to having her judgment opposed. She asked Elizabeth many things about her family: their number, their education, whether any of them was likely to be married, and what her mother's name had been before marriage. Elizabeth felt all the impoliteness of these questions, but answered them calmly. Lady Catherine then asked:

	'Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?'

	'A little.'

	'Oh, then - some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our piano is a very good one - probably much better than - do your sisters play and sing?'

	'One of them does.'

	'Why did you not all learn? You ought all to have learned. Do you draw?'

	'No, not at all.'

	'What, none of you?'

	'Not one.'

	'That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity- Are any of your younger sisters out in society, Miss Bennet?'

	'Yes, all of them.'

	'All! What, all five at the same time? Very strange! And you only the second. What is your age?'

	'With three younger sisters grown up,' replied Elizabeth smiling,' you can hardly expect me to speak on that subject.'

	Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer, and Elizabeth thought that perhaps she was the first person who had dared to speak to her in that way.

	'You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure - therefore you need not hide your age.'

	'I am not yet twenty-one.'

	When the gentlemen joined them, the card tables were placed. At one table Lady Catherine played with Sir William and with Mr and Mrs Collins; at the other, Miss de Bourgh with Mrs Jenkinson and the two girls. Lady Catherine continued to talk, pointing out the mistakes made by others. Mr Collins agreed with everything she said, thanking her for every game he won, and apologizing if he thought he had won too many. Hardly a word was spoken at the other table, and Elizabeth found the game extremely boring.



	CHAPTER THIRTEEN

	Visitors to Rosings

	In a quiet way, with walks and occasional visits to Rosings, the first two weeks of Elizabeth's stay soon passed. Sir William Lucas had returned home, but the next week brought an addition to the family at Rosings. Mr Darcy was expected, and when he came, he brought with him Colonel Fitzwilliam, his cousin.

	The day after their arrival, they came to the Parsonage. Colonel Fitzwilliam was about thirty, not very good-looking, but in person and manners most truly a gentleman. Mr Darcy looked just as he had always done, was polite but spoke little. Elizabeth only lowered her head in greeting without saying a word.

	Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly, with the confidence of a man of good family. After a long silence, Mr Darcy inquired after the health of Elizabeth's family. She answered him in the usual way and, after a moment's pause, added: 'My oldest sister has been in town during the last three months. Have you not seen her?'

	She thought that he looked a little confused as he answered that he had not been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet.

	It was some days before the next invitation came from Rosings. While there were visitors in the house, the company from the Parsonage were not necessary. When the invitation did arrive, and they joined the party in Lady Catherine's sitting room, Lady Catherine received them politely, but it was clear that they were not as welcome as they had been when she could get nobody else.

	Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them. Anything was a welcome relief at Rosings, and Mrs Collins's pretty friend had attracted him. He now seated himself by her, and talked so agreeably that Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that room before. Their conversation was so full of spirit that it drew the attention of Lady Catherine herself. As for Mr Darcy, his eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of interest. At last Lady Catherine called out:

	'What are you saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking of? What are you telling Miss Bennet?'

	'We are speaking of music, madam,' he said.

	'Of music! Then please speak out loud. I must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music. There are few people in England, I suppose, who have a better natural taste in music than myself. I would have been an excellent performer.'

	She then inquired after the playing of Darcy's sister, Georgiana, and he spoke in brotherly praise of her skill.

	'She must practise continually,' Lady Catherine went on. 'I have told Miss Bennet several times that she will never play really well unless she practises more, and though Mrs Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome to come to Rosings every day and play the piano in Mrs Jenkinson's room. She would be in nobody's way, you know, in that part of the house.'

	Mr Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's lack of good manners, and said nothing.

	When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth that she had promised to play to him, and she sat down immediately at the piano. He pulled a chair up near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song and then talked to her other nephew, until Darcy walked away from her, and, moving towards the piano, positioned himself so that he had a view of the performer's face. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first convenient pause turned to him with a smile and said:

	'You mean to frighten me, Mr Darcy, by coming with all this ceremony to hear me. But I will not be afraid, though your sister does play so well.'

	'I shall not say that you are mistaken,' he replied, 'because you could not really suppose me to have any intention of frightening you.'

	Elizabeth laughed, and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam: 'Your cousin will teach you not to believe a word I say. It makes me want to behave badly towards him.'

	'Then let me hear why you are angry with him,' said Colonel Fitzwilliam.

	'You shall hear - but be ready for something very terrible. The first time I ever saw him was at a ball - and what do you think he did at this ball? He danced only four dances, though there were very few gentlemen and, to my certain knowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down for lack of a partner.'

	'I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady there, except from my own party.'

	'True, but can nobody ever be introduced in a ballroom?'

	'Perhaps,' said Darcy, 'I would have behaved better if I had asked for an introduction, but I am not someone who can easily make friends with strangers.'

	'Shall we ask your cousin the reason for this?' said Elizabeth, addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam.

	'I can answer your question,' said Fitzwilliam. 'It is because he will not give himself the trouble.'

	'I have certainly not the ability that some people possess,' said Darcy, 'of holding a conversation easily with those whom I have never seen before.'

	Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know what they were talking about. Elizabeth immediately began to play again. Lady Catherine came nearer, and, after listening for a few minutes, said to Darcy:

	'She uses her fingers well, though her taste is not equal to Anne's. Anne would have been a truly great performer if her health had allowed her to learn.'

	Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see whether he agreed with this praise of his cousin, but neither at that moment nor at any other could she see any sign of love. Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's performance until her carriage was ready to take them all home.

	Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning writing to Jane, while Mrs Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village, when she was interrupted by a ring at the front door, the signal of a visitor. When the door of the room was opened, to her great surprise Mr Darcy, and Mr Darcy alone, entered.

	He seemed astonished, too, to find her alone, and apologized for the interruption by letting her know that he had expected all the ladies to be at home.

	They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was necessary, therefore, to speak of something, so, wanting to know what he would say on the subject of their leaving Netherfield so quickly, she remarked:

	'How very suddenly you all left Netherfield last November,

	'Mr Darcy! Mr Bingley and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?'

	'Perfectly so, thank you.'

	After a short pause, she added:

	'I understand that Mr Bingley has not much idea of ever returning to Netherfield again?'

	'It is probable that he may spend very little of his time there in future.'

	'If he means to be very little at Netherfield, it would be better for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place completely, for then we might possibly get a settled family there.'

	'I should not be surprised,' said Darcy, 'if he were to give it up, if he found another property that suited him.'

	Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his friend, and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him.

	He understood, and very soon began with, 'Mr Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife. It must be very pleasant for her to be settled within such an easy distance of her own family and friends.'

	'An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly 50 miles. I should never have said that Mrs Collins was settled near her family.'

	'It is a proof of your own close ties to your home. Anything beyond the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.'

	Then he moved his chair a little towards her, and said, 'You cannot have a right to such very strong local feeling. You cannot always have been at Longbourn.'

	Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of feeling. He moved his chair back again, took a newspaper from the table, and said in a colder voice:

	'Are you pleased with Kent?'

	A short conversation on the subject of the country followed. It was soon brought to an end by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, who had just returned from their walk.

	'What can be the meaning of this?' said Charlotte, as soon as Darcy was gone. 'My dear Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never have visited us in this familiar way.'

	But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely to be the case, and they could only suppose his visit to result from the difficulty of finding anything to do at that time of year. Gentlemen cannot always stay indoors, and the nearness of the Parsonage encouraged the two cousins, from this period, to walk there almost every day, sometimes separately and sometimes together. It was plain that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he found pleasure in their society, but Mr Darcy could not come for that reason, because he frequently sat there for ten minutes at a time without opening his lips. Mrs Collins did not know how to explain it. He certainly looked at Elizabeth a great deal, and she once or twice suggested to her friend the possibility that he was interested in her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea.



	CHAPTER FOURTEEN

	Mr Darcy

	During Elizabeth's daily walk within the park of Rosings, which the people at the Parsonage were permitted to visit, she more than once unexpectedly met Mr Darcy. To prevent it ever happening again, she took care on the first occasion to inform him that it was her favourite part. It was very strange, therefore, that it happened a second time. But it did, and even a third. He actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He never said a great deal, and she did not give herself the trouble of talking or listening much.

	One day she was reading Jane's last letter again as she walked, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr Darcy, she looked up and saw that Colonel Fitzwilliam was coming to meet her. They walked together towards the Parsonage.

	'Is it settled that you leave Kent on Saturday?' she asked.

	'Yes - if Darcy does not put it off again. But he arranges our business just as he pleases. I share with him the responsibility of looking after Miss Darcy.'

	'Do you really? And does she give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes difficult to manage.'

	As she spoke, she saw him looking at her very seriously, and his manner made her believe that she had somehow or other got fairly near the truth. She replied immediately:

	'You need not be frightened. I have never heard any harm of her. She is a great favourite of some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley. I think that you know them.'

	'I know them a little. Their brother is a great friend of Darcy's.'

	'Oh, yes,' said Elizabeth sharply, 'Mr Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr Bingley, and takes great care of him.'

	'Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy does take care of him. From something that he told me, I have reason to think that Bingley must have cause to be very grateful to him.'

	'What do you mean?'

	'It is a matter which Darcy, of course, could not wish to be generally known, because if it were to reach the lady's family it would be an unpleasant thing.'

	'You may depend on my not mentioning it.'

	'What he told me was this: that he congratulated himself on having saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most unwise marriage, but without mentioning names or any other details.'

	'Did Mr Darcy give you his reasons for his involvement?'

	'I understood that there were some very strong objections to the lady.'

	Elizabeth walked on, her heart swelling with anger. She could not trust herself further with the subject, and therefore, quickly changing the conversation, talked about different matters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut in her own room as soon as their visitor had left them, she could think without interruption of all that she had heard. She had never doubted that Mr Darcy had been involved in the action taken to separate Mr Bingley and Jane, but she had always blamed Miss Bingley as the chief person responsible. But now she knew. He was the cause - his pride was the cause - of all that Jane had suffered. He had ruined every hope of happiness for the most loving, most generous heart in the world.

	'There were some very strong objections to the lady,' were Colonel Fitzwilliam's words, and these strong objections probably included her having one uncle who was a country lawyer and another who was in business in London.

	'To Jane herself,' she whispered, 'there could be no possible objection - she is all beauty and goodness! Her understanding is excellent, her mind improved, and her manners excellent. Neither could my father be to blame, since he has abilities that Mr Darcy himself could not fail to respect.' But when she thought of her mother her confidence did weaken a little.

	The excitement and tears which the subject caused brought on a headache, and it became so much worse towards the evening that, added to her unwillingness to see Mr Darcy, it made her decide not to go with her cousins to Rosings, where they were invited to take tea. Mrs Collins, seeing that she was really unwell, did not urge her to go, and prevented her husband as much as possible from urging her, but Mr Collins could not hide his fear that Lady Catherine might be rather displeased by her staying at home.

	When they had gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to sharpen her anger as much as possible against Mr Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her arrival in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, but in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a lack of the cheerfulness that had always been natural to her. Mr Darcy's shameful pride in what he had been able to cause gave Elizabeth a keener sense of her sister's sufferings.

	At this point she was suddenly interrupted by the sound of the doorbell and, to her complete astonishment, she saw Mr Darcy walk into the room. In a hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her health. She answered him with cold politeness. He sat down for a few moments, and then, getting up, walked around the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but did not say a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her in a troubled manner, and began to speak:

	'I have struggled without success. My feelings will not be controlled. You must allow me to tell you how warmly I admire and love you.'

	Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression. She looked away, red in the face, and was silent. He considered this enough encouragement, and the expression of all that he felt for her immediately followed.

	He spoke well, but there were other feelings to be described besides those of his heart, and his words were more concerned with pride than love. His sense of her inferiority, his feeling that he was lowering himself, the family considerations that had caused his judgment to oppose his preference, all were expressed with a force that was unlikely to make his proposal acceptable.

	In spite of her deeply rooted dislike, she could not fail to realize what an honour it was to receive such a man's attention, and though her intentions did not change for one moment, she was at first sorry for the pain that he would receive, until, insulted by his language as he continued, she lost all pity in anger. She tried to control herself, so she could answer him patiently when he had finished. He ended by expressing the hope that he would now be rewarded by her acceptance of his hand in marriage. As he said this, she could clearly see that he had no doubt of a favourable answer. Such confidence could only increase her annoyance, and when he had ended, the colour in her face deepened and she said:

	'If I could feel grateful, as I believe one should in such a situation, I would now thank you. But I cannot - I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly given it most unwillingly. The reasons which, you tell me, have long prevented the expression of your feelings, can have little difficulty in bringing them under control.'

	Mr Darcy, whose eyes were fixed on her face, seemed to hear her words with no less anger than surprise. He became pale, and the confusion in his mind was plain in every feature. Finally, in a voice of forced calmness, he said:

	'And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting! I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little attempt at politeness, I am refused.'

	'I might as well inquire,' she replied, 'why, with so clear an intention of insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me against your will. Was that not some excuse for impoliteness, if I was impolite? But I have other reasons. Do you think that any consideration would lead me to accept the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps forever, the happiness of my most dearly loved sister?'

	As she spoke these words, Mr Darcy's face changed colour, but he listened without interrupting her while she continued:

	'Nothing can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part that you played there. You cannot state that you have not been the chief, if not the only means of dividing the pair of them.'

	She paused, and saw that he was listening in a manner that proved him to be unmoved.

	'Is it not true that you have done it?' she repeated.

	He then replied with calmness: 'Yes, it is true that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your sister, and that I am glad of my success. I have been kinder towards him than towards myself Elizabeth appeared not to notice this polite remark, but its meaning did not escape her, nor was it likely to soften her feelings.

	'But it is not only this affair,' she continued, 'on which my dislike is based. Long before, your character was made plain in the story which I received many months ago from Mr Wickham.'

	'You take an eager interest in that gentleman's concerns,' said Darcy in a more troubled voice, and with deeper colour in his face.

	'No one who knows his misfortunes can help feeling an interest in him.'

	'His misfortunes!' repeated Darcy scornfully. 'Yes, his misfortunes have been great.'

	'And you are responsible,' cried Elizabeth with energy. 'You have reduced him to his present state.'

	'And this,' cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room, 'is your opinion of me. I thank you for explaining it so fully. But perhaps,' he added, stopping in his walk, and turning towards her, 'these offences might have been forgiven if your pride had not been hurt by my honest explanation of the reasons that made me wait so long. I am not ashamed of the feelings that I expressed. They were natural and fair. Could you expect me to be happy about the inferiority of your relations?'

	Elizabeth felt herself becoming more angry every moment, but she tried to speak calmly as she said:

	'You could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way that would have led me to accept it.'

	Again his astonishment was clear. She went on:

	'From the very beginning, your manners struck me as showing the greatest pride in yourself and scorn for the feelings of others, and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world whom I could ever be persuaded to marry.'

	'You have said quite enough, madam. Forgive me for having wasted so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness.'

	And with these words he quickly left the room.

	The disorder of Elizabeth's mind was now painfully great, and from actual weakness she sat down and cried for half an hour. Her astonishment increased every moment. That she should receive an offer of marriage from Mr Darcy! That he should be so much in love with her that he wished to marry her in spite of all the objections that had made him prevent his friend's marrying her sister, and which must appear equally strong in his own case! And his shameful pride! His shameless admission of what he had done with regard to Jane! His unfeeling manner, his cruelty towards Mr Wickham!

	She continued with these unhappy thoughts until the sound of the others returning from Rosings made her hurry away to her own room.



	CHAPTER FIFTEEN

	Elizabeth Receives a Letter

	Elizabeth woke the next morning to the same thoughts. It was impossible to fix her mind on anything else, so she decided soon after breakfast to give herself air and exercise. She was going directly towards her favourite part of the park, when she remembered that Mr Darcy sometimes came there, and she turned up the narrow road outside Rosings.

	After a little time she caught sight of a gentleman within the park. She had turned away, but when she heard a voice calling her, though it was Mr Darcy's, she moved towards the gate. He, too, had reached it by this time. Holding out a letter, he said, with a look of proud calm, 'Will you do me the honour of reading this?' Then he turned and was soon out of sight.

	Elizabeth opened the letter and saw two sheets, completely covered in handwriting. The letter had been written at Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and read as follows:

	Do not be troubled, madam, on receiving this letter. I write without any intention of upsetting you, or wounding my own self-respect, by mentioning unnecessarily what passed between us last night. But my character demands this to be written and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I ask your attention. You will, I know, give it unwillingly, but I must request it as a matter of justice.

	Last night, you charged me with two offences of a very different kind. The first was that I had separated Mr Bingley from your sister, and the other that I had ruined the hopes of Mr Wickham. I must now explain these matters.

	I had not been in Hertfordshire for long before I saw that Bingley preferred your oldest sister to any other young woman there. I did not take this seriously, because I had often seen him in love before. But at the ball at Netherfield, while I had the honour of dancing with you, I first realized, through Sir William Lucas's accidental information, that Bingley's attentions to your sister had caused a general expectation that they would be married. From that moment I watched my friend carefully, and saw that his attraction to Miss Bennet was beyond what I had ever seen in him before. I also watched your sister. Her look and manner were open, cheerful and pleasing as ever, but I saw no sign of strong feeling. If you have not been mistaken here, I must have been deceived. Your greater knowledge of your sister makes it probable that you were right.

	My objections to the marriage were not only those which I mentioned last night in my own case. There were others. The inferiority of your mother's family, though a problem, was nothing compared with the total lack of good manners so frequently shown by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your father. Pardon me - it pains me to offend you. Let it be of comfort to you that the behaviour of yourself and your older sister has been so honourably free from such faults.

	The anxiety of Bingley's sisters had been excited as much as my own. The action that followed is known to you. But I do not suppose that the marriage would have been prevented if I had not persuaded Bingley that your sister did not care for him. He believed me when I told him that he had deceived himself.

	I cannot blame myself for having done this. There is only one point on which I feel some discomfort, and that is that I purposely deceived him by hiding from him the fact of your sister's being in town.

	With regard to that other charge, of having done harm to Mr Wickham, I can only defend myself by telling the whole story. Mr Wickham was the son of my father's manager, a respectable man. My father had the son well educated, and, hoping that the church would be his profession, intended to provide for him in it. I, as a young man of about the same age, very soon realized that he had a bad character, a fact which he carefully hid from my father. Before he died, my father asked me to encourage his development, and, if he joined the church, to let him have a valuable family living. Shortly afterwards, Mr Wickham wrote to say that he had decided against becoming a minister. He wished instead to study law, and demanded money to help him. I willingly gave him this, knowing that he was not fit for the church, and he then in return gave up all claim to any appointment in it. Later, the position became free, and, having neglected his studies of the law and lived a life of laziness, he demanded it, and I refused.

	Last summer he again most painfully forced himself on my notice. I must now mention a family matter that I would myself wish to forget, and which only present necessity causes me to make known to you. I feel quite confident of your ability to keep my secret.

	My sister, who is ten years younger than I am, had just left school, and was placed in the care of a lady in Ramsgate. My trust in this woman was not well judged. She allowed Wickham, whom she knew, to make love to my sister, who agreed to run away with him. I went down to see her just before the intended flight. Georgiana was ashamed, and told me everything. You may imagine what I felt, and how I acted.

	Wickham's chief object was, without doubt, my sister's fortune, which is thirty thousand pounds, but I cannot help supposing that he also hoped to annoy me.

	Colonel Fitzwilliam will bear witness to the truth of everything that I have written here. I shall try to find some opportunity of putting this letter into your hands during the morning.

	Sincerely,

	FITZWILLIAM DARCY.

	As Elizabeth eagerly read the letter, she experienced every kind of feeling. She began with a strong prejudice against whatever it might contain, and wished to disbelieve completely all the explanations that it put forward. She repeatedly told herself: 'This must be false! This cannot be!' When she had gone through the whole document, she put it away, promising herself that she would never look at it again.

	But she could not do that. In half a minute the letter was unfolded again. She read and reread, with the closest attention, the details about Wickham. Of the two men concerned, one was free from blame, the other worthless. But how to decide between them? She tried to remember some example of goodness on Wickham's side. She could find none. He had pleased her by his appearance, his voice and his manner, but she knew nothing about his real character. The story of his intentions regarding Miss Darcy received some support from her conversation with Colonel Fitzwilliam only the morning before, and, according to Darcy, the Colonel would support every detail of this story.

	She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between Wickham and herself during their first evening at Mr Philips's. Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was now struck with the bad taste of such remarks made to a stranger, and was surprised that it had escaped her notice before. She saw the lack of good breeding in the way in which he had put himself forward. She remembered that he had claimed to have no fear of seeing Mr Darcy, but he had avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week. She remembered also that until the Netherfield family had left the area, he had told his story to no one but herself, but after their removal he had discussed it freely, although he had told her that respect for the father would always prevent him from making public the injustice that was done to him by the son.

	She became completely ashamed of herself. She felt that she had been blind, prejudiced, unreasonable.

	She read again the part of the letter about Jane and was forced to admit to herself the justice of Darcy's description of her sister. She knew that Jane's feelings, though strong, were usually well hidden.

	When she came to the part in which her family were mentioned, in words so wounding to her pride but still so just in the blame that they expressed, her sense of shame was severe. The praise of herself and her sister was not unfelt, but it could not comfort her, and when she considered that Jane's disappointment had, in fact, been the work of her nearest relations, she felt in lower spirits than she had ever been before.

	She soon began to know much of the letter by heart. She studied every sentence, and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different. When she remembered the manner in which he had addressed her, she was still full of anger, but when she considered how unfairly she had misjudged him, her anger was turned against herself, and his disappointed feelings became the object of pity. She could feel grateful for his attachment and could respect his general character, but she could not approve of him, or be sorry about her refusal, or feel the slightest desire ever to see him again. In her own past behaviour, there was a continual cause for annoyance, and in the faults of her family, a subject of even heavier sorrow. They would never be put right. Her father, happy to laugh at them, would never trouble himself to control the wild foolishness of his youngest daughters, and her mother, with manners so far from perfect herself, was completely unconscious of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane in an attempt to control the silliness of Kitty and Lydia, but while they were encouraged by their mother's fond carelessness, what chance could there be of improvement? Kitty, weak- spirited, nervous, and completely under Lydia's influence, had always been offended by their advice, and Lydia, careless and determined to have her own way, would hardly give them a hearing. They were foolish, lazy and empty-headed. While there was an officer in Meryton, they would be trying to attract him, and while Meryton was within walking distance of Longbourn, they would be going there forever.

	Anxiety for Jane was another cause of concern, and Mr Darcy's explanation, by bringing back all her former good opinion of Bingley, increased the sense of what Jane had lost.

	It may easily be believed that the events of the last two days had such an effect on Elizabeth's naturally happy spirits that she found it almost impossible to appear even reasonably cheerful. It was with a ready heart that she watched her visit to Hunsford come to an end in the next week. Mr Darcy had, she knew, left shortly after handing her the letter.

	At last the boxes were packed, and the goodbyes over, not without a long speech from Mr Collins. The carriage drove off towards London, where Jane was to join the party for home.

	'Oh!' cried Maria, after a few minutes' silence. 'It seems only a day or two since we first came! But so many things have happened!'

	'A great many,' said her companion sadly.

	'We had dinner nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice! How much I shall have to tell!'

	Elizabeth privately added, 'And how much I shall have to hide!'



	CHAPTER SIXTEEN

	Elizabeth and Jane Return Home

	It was the second week in May when Jane, Elizabeth and Maria set out from London together for Hertfordshire, and as they came near the small hotel where Mr Bennet's carriage would meet them, they saw both Kitty and Lydia looking out of an upstairs room. These two girls had been in the place for more than an hour, happily employed in visiting a hat shop opposite and arranging a meal.

	After welcoming their sisters, they proudly pointed to a table laid out with cold meat, crying, 'Isn't this nice? Isn't it a pleasant surprise?'

	'And we want all of you to be our guests,' added Lydia, 'but you must lend us the money, because we have just spent ours at the shop over there.' Then, showing the things that she had bought: 'Look here, I have bought this hat. I don't think that it is very pretty, but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and remake it.'

	And when her sisters criticized it as ugly, she added, 'It will not much matter what one wears this summer, as the regiment is leaving Meryton in two weeks' time.'

	'Are they, really?' cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.

	'They are going to be camped near Brighton, and I do so want our father to take us all there for the summer! Mother would like to go, too, of all things!'

	'Yes,' thought Elizabeth, 'that would be pleasant. Oh, heavens! Brighton and a whole camp full of soldiers, to us, who have been troubled enough already by one small regiment and the monthly dances at Meryton!'

	'Now I have some news,' said Lydia, as they sat down at the table. 'It is excellent news about a person whom we all like.'

	Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told that he need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said:

	'Why must you always be so formal and correct? You thought that the waiter must not hear, as if he cared! But he is an ugly man! I am glad that he has gone. Well, but now for my news. It is about dear Wickham. There is no danger of his marrying Mary King. She has gone away. Wickham is safe.'

	'And Mary King is safe!' added Elizabeth. 'Safe from a marriage which would be unwise in regard to fortune.'

	As soon as everyone had eaten, and the older ones had paid, the carriage was ordered and the whole party, with their boxes, needlework bags and packages, and the unwelcome addition of all Kitty's and Lydia's shopping, were seated in it.

	'How nicely we are packed in!' cried Lydia. 'Now let us be quite comfortable, and talk and laugh all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband before you came back. Jane is almost twenty-three! How ashamed I should be of not being married before that age! Oh, how I should like to be married before any of you!'

	In this noisy manner, with the help of Kitty, Lydia tried to amuse her companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham's name.

	Their welcome home was most kind. Mrs Bennet was glad to see Jane as beautiful as ever, and more than once Mr Bennet said to Elizabeth: 'I am glad that you have come back, Lizzy.'

	Their party was large, as almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news. Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, across the table, after the health and housekeeping affairs of her oldest daughter. Mrs Bennet was doubly engaged, on the one hand collecting an account of the present London fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and, on the other, repeating them all to the younger Miss Lucases. Lydia, in a voice rather louder than anyone else's, was describing the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would listen to her.

	'Oh, Mary,' she said, 'I wish you had gone with us! We had such fun! We talked and laughed so loudly that anybody might have heard us 10 miles away!'

	To this, Mary replied, 'Do not think, my dear sister, that I scorn such pleasures. But I admit that they have no attraction for me. I would much prefer a book.'

	But Lydia heard not a word of this answer. She rarely listened to anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.

	In the afternoon, Lydia was anxious for the other girls to walk to Meryton, but Elizabeth steadily opposed the suggestion. It should not be said that the Misses Bennet could not be at home half a day before they were in search of the officers. She did not want to see Wickham again, and was determined to avoid doing so for as long as possible.

	***

	Elizabeth's impatience to inform Jane of what had happened could no longer be controlled, and at last, having decided to keep back every detail with which her sister was concerned, and having warned her to be surprised, she described to her the next morning most of the scene between Mr Darcy and herself. She then spoke of the letter, repeating all that it contained which mentioned George Wickham. What a blow this was for poor Jane, who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that so much evil existed in the whole human race, as was collected here in one person.

	'I do not know when I have been more shocked,' she said. 'Wickham so very bad! It is almost beyond belief. And poor Mr Darcy! Dear Lizzy, only consider what he must have suffered! Such a disappointment, and with the knowledge of your bad opinion too! And having to tell such a thing about his sister!'

	'There is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I ought or ought not to make known the truth about Wickham's character to our friends in general.'

	Miss Bennet thought a little, and then replied, 'Surely there can be no reason for shaming him so terribly. What is your own opinion?'

	'That it ought not to be attempted. Mr Darcy has not given me permission to make his information public. At present I will say nothing about it.'

	'You are quite right. It might ruin him forever, if his past became known. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to improve.'

	The confusion in Elizabeth's mind was relieved by this conversation. She had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for two weeks, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane whenever she might want to talk again of either. But she dared not tell the other half of Mr Darcy's letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she had been valued by his friend. Here was knowledge which no one could share.

	She now had time to observe the real state of her sister's spirits. Jane was not happy. She still had very warm feelings for Bingley.

	'Well, Lizzy,' said Mrs Bennet one day, 'what is your opinion now of this sad business of Jane's?'

	'I do not think that Mr Bingley will ever live at Netherfield again.'

	'Oh, well! It is just as he chooses. Well, my comfort is, I am sure that Jane will die of a broken heart, and then he will be sorry for what he has done.'

	But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectations, she did not answer.

	'Well, Lizzy,' her mother continued, soon afterwards, 'and so the Collinses live very comfortably, do they? Charlotte is an excellent manager, I expect. If she is half as sharp as her mother, she is saving enough. And I suppose they often talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look on it quite as their own, I dare say. I would be ashamed of owning somewhere that was left me on such unjust conditions.'



	CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

	The Regiment Leaves Meryton

	The second week of their return was the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were in the lowest of spirits. Only the older Misses Bennet were still able to eat, drink and sleep, and to continue the usual course of their lives. Very frequently they were charged with heartlessness by Kitty and Lydia, whose own unhappiness was extreme.

	'Heavens! What will become of us?' they would often cry in bitterness. 'How can you be smiling so, Lizzy?' Their fond mother shared all their unhappiness. She remembered what she had suffered on a similar occasion in her youth.

	'I am sure,' she said, 'that I cried for two days when Colonel Millar's regiment went away. I thought that my heart would break.'

	'I am sure that mine will break,' said Lydia.

	'If only we could go to Brighton,' said Mrs Bennet.

	'Oh, yes! But Father is so disagreeable.'

	Such were the complaints continually repeated at Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be amused by them, but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt once more the justice of Mr Darcy's criticisms, and she had never been so ready to pardon his part in the affairs of his friend.

	But the darkness of Lydia's future was lightened shortly afterwards. She received an invitation from Mrs Forster, the wife of the colonel of the regiment, to go with her to Brighton. This friend was a young woman, and very recently married.

	The joy of Lydia on this occasion, the pleasure of Mrs Bennet, and the jealous anger of Kitty, are hardly to be described. Without any concern for her sister's feelings, Lydia flew about the house in restless excitement, calling for everybody's congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever, while the luckless Kitty continued to complain.

	'I cannot see why Mrs Forster did not ask me as well as Lydia,' she said, 'I have just as much right to be asked as she has, and more, too, because I am two years older.'

	Elizabeth tried to make her more reasonable, and Jane urged her to bear her disappointment quietly, but without success. As for Elizabeth herself, she considered this invitation as the deathblow to any possibility of common sense in Lydia, and, though such an act would make her hated if it became known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her go. She suggested to him the probability of Lydia's being even more foolish with such a companion at Brighton, where the opportunities for silliness must be greater than at home.

	'If you knew,' said Elizabeth, 'of the very great disadvantage which has already come from the public notice of Lydia's uncontrolled behaviour, I am sure that you would judge it unwise to let her go.'

	'Already come!' repeated Mr Bennet. 'What! Has she frightened away some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be disheartened. Young men who cannot bear to be connected with a little silliness are not worth worrying over.'

	But Elizabeth, excusing herself for speaking so plainly to her father, continued in her attempt to persuade him of the growing lack of self-control that both his younger daughters showed in public, and the danger of their characters becoming fixed. He saw that her whole heart was in the subject and, taking her hand warmly, said in reply:

	'Do not make yourself anxious, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known, you must be respected and valued, and you will not appear to less advantage because you have a pair of- or I may say, three - very silly sisters. We shall have no peace at home if Lydia does not go to Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will keep her from any real harm, and she is luckily too poor to attract any fortune-hunters. At Brighton she will be of less importance than here. Let us hope, therefore, that it may teach her a little about life.'

	With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be satisfied.

	***

	Elizabeth now saw Wickham for the last time. Having met him frequently since her return, she had become fairly well used to the situation. Her interest in him had quite gone, and in his present behaviour to herself she had a fresh cause for displeasure. The readiness that he soon showed in renewing his attentions to her, now that Miss King had gone, proved that he judged her to be foolish enough to be pleased by notice from him at any time that he chose to give it.

	On the very last day of the regiment's stay he had dinner, with some other officers at Longbourn. Elizabeth was so unwilling to part from him in a friendly way that she mentioned the fact that Colonel Fitzwilliam and Mr Darcy had both spent three weeks at Rosings, and asked him whether he was acquainted with the former.

	He looked surprised, displeased, anxious; but, controlling himself, soon replied that he had formerly seen him often, and asked how she liked him. She answered warmly in his favour, and went on to say that from knowing Mr Darcy better, he, too, was better understood and liked.

	Wickham's anxiety now appeared in a reddened face and a troubled look. He did not dare to say much more, but in spite of an appearance of cheerfulness, it was clear that he would now be glad to leave the area.

	When the party ended, Lydia returned with Mrs Forster to Meryton, from which place they would set out early the next morning. The separation between her and her family was noisy rather than painful. Kitty was the only one to cry, and her tears were from jealousy and from pity for herself. In the loud happiness of Lydia herself in saying goodbye, the more gentle last words of her sisters were spoken without being heard.



	CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

	Pemberley

	Mr Bennet's marriage had been the result of a lack of good judgment. Attracted by youth and beauty, and that appearance of good temper which they usually give, he had married a woman whose weak understanding and narrow mind had very soon put an end to real love for her. Respect and confidence had gone forever, and his hopes of happiness at home were ended. But he was fond of the country and of books, and his wife's foolishness and lack of knowledge gave him amusement.

	Elizabeth had never-been blind to the unfitting nature of her father's behaviour as a husband. It had always upset her, but, respecting his abilities and grateful for his caring treatment of herself, she had tried to forget what she could not fail to notice. But she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages that must be experienced by the children of so unsuitable a marriage.

	When Lydia went away, she promised to write very often and in great detail to her mother and Kitty, but her letters were always long expected and very short. Those to her mother contained little but unimportant news, and those to Kitty, though longer, contained too many secrets to be read to the family.

	Life in Meryton was undoubtedly duller after the regiment had left. Elizabeth began to look forward to her northern tour with her aunt and uncle, the date of which was approaching. Her disappointment was therefore great when she learnt that business prevented her uncle from being away from London as long as he had hoped. They were forced to give up the visit to the Lakes, and to choose a shorter tour; according to the present plan, they were to go no further north than Derbyshire, where Mrs Gardiner hoped to revisit the town in which she had spent the earlier part of her life. There were many ideas connected in Elizabeth's mind with the mention of Derbyshire. It was impossible for her to see or hear the word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner.

	***

	At last the period of waiting was over, and Mr and Mrs Gardiner, with their four children, appeared at Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, would be left in the special care of their cousin Jane, who was the favourite, and whose steady good sense and sweetness of temper exactly suited her for looking after them in every way - teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.

	The Gardiners stayed at Longbourn for only one night, and set out the next morning with Elizabeth on their travels. One enjoyment was certain - that of pleasure in each other's company.

	Their journey took them to many interesting and well-known places - Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, and others. At last, after having seen all the chief sights of the area, they continued on their way to the little town of Lambton in Derbyshire, the scene of Mrs Gardiner's former home, and Elizabeth found that Pemberley was only 5 miles away from Lambton. In talking over their plans, Mrs Gardiner expressed a wish to see the place again. Mr Gardiner expressed his willingness, and their niece was asked for her approval.

	Elizabeth was in an awkward situation. She felt that she had no business at Pemberley, and she pretended, therefore, that she was tired of seeing great houses. Mrs Gardiner thought this stupid, and Elizabeth did not know what to do. The possibility of meeting Mr Darcy was frightening. She trembled at the very idea. Fortunately, she was able to find out from a servant at the hotel where they were staying that Pemberley's owner was absent, so when the subject was mentioned again the next morning, she readily agreed, because her unwillingness had turned to interest.

	As they drove along, Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired every notable view. The park was very large, and they passed through a beautiful wood stretching over a wide area. Pemberley House was a large, fine- looking stone building, on ground slightly higher than the park; in front, a stream had been widened without making it appear at all artificial. Elizabeth had never seen a place for which nature had done so much, or where natural beauty had been so little spoilt by awkward taste. Her aunt and uncle were equally warm in their admiration, and at that moment she felt that there were in fact advantages to being the lady of Pemberley!

	On arriving at the house, they were admitted to the hall. The housekeeper was a respectable-looking woman, who showed them round the chief rooms. From every window there were beauties to be seen. The rooms themselves were of good height and fine shape, and with furniture in excellent taste.

	'I might have been the lady of this place,' she thought. 'Instead of viewing it as a stranger, I might have been welcoming my aunt and uncle as my guests. But no,' she remembered, 'I would not have been allowed to invite my relations.'

	This was a lucky thought - it saved her from feeling sorry for herself.

	She wished very much to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master was really absent. At last the question was asked by her uncle, and she turned away anxiously when the reply came, 'We expect him tomorrow, with a large party of friends.'

	Her aunt now called her to look at a picture, and asked her with a smile how she liked it. It was of Wickham. The housekeeper mentioned his name, and added, 'He has now gone into the army, but I am afraid that he has turned out very wild.'

	Mrs Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not return it.

	They then looked at pictures of Mr Darcy and his sister.

	'And is Miss Darcy as good-looking as her brother?' said Mr Gardiner.

	'Oh, yes,' replied the housekeeper, 'the best-looking young lady that ever was seen, and so skilled! She plays and sings the whole day long. In the next room there is a new instrument that has just arrived for her - a present from my master. She is coming here tomorrow with him.'

	'Does your master spend much time at Pemberley?'

	'Not as much as I would wish, sir. Miss Darcy is always here for the summer months.'

	'Except,' thought Elizabeth, 'when she goes to Ramsgate.'

	'If your master married, you might see more of him.'

	'Yes, sir, but I do not know who is good enough for him.'

	Mr and Mrs Gardiner smiled.

	'I say no more than the truth. I have never had an angry word from him in my life, and I have known him ever since he was four years old.'

	Elizabeth's keenest attention was excited. This was praise of the strongest kind, and most opposite to her ideas.

	'He is the best master that ever lived. Some people call him proud, but I never saw anything of it.'

	Mr Gardiner was highly amused as she continued to describe the good qualities of her master. He judged that her extreme praise of him was the result of family prejudice.

	'This fine account of him,' whispered Mrs Gardiner to her niece, 'does not agree with his behaviour to our poor friend.'

	Elizabeth said rather quietly that they might have been deceived.

	'That is not very likely. Our information was too direct.'

	They were then shown into a very pretty little sitting room with new furniture, and were told that it was done just to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had become fond of the room when last at Pemberley.

	'It is always the way with him,' the housekeeper explained. 'Whatever can give his sister pleasure is sure to be done.'

	'He is a good brother,' said Elizabeth.

	There was certainly at this moment in her mind a more gentle feeling towards him than she had ever had when she was closely acquainted with him. Every idea brought forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as she looked once again at his picture, she felt more grateful to him for his good opinion of her than she had ever done before.

	***

	The house had now been examined, and they went outside in the charge of the gardener to admire the grounds. As they walked towards the river, Elizabeth turned back to look again, and as she did so, the owner of the building suddenly came forward from the road that led behind it.

	They were within 20 yards of each other, and his appearance was so sudden that it was impossible to avoid him. Their eyes met immediately. He stopped, and then for a moment seemed unable to move from surprise. Quickly recovering his self- control, though, he walked towards the party and spoke to Elizabeth, if not with perfect calm, at least with perfect politeness.

	She had immediately turned away, but when he approached she received his greetings with a confusion that it was impossible to control. Mr and Mrs Gardiner stood a little way off while he was talking to their niece, who, shocked by their meeting, hardly dared lift her eyes to his face and did not know what answer she returned to his polite inquiries after her family. She was full of surprise at the change in his manner since they last parted, and found that every sentence that he spoke was increasing her confusion. As the realization of the awkwardness of her being found there returned to her mind, the few minutes in which they were together were some of the most uncomfortable in her life. He did not seem less shocked. When he spoke, his voice had none of its usual calmness, and he repeated some of his questions more than once.

	At last, every idea seemed to fail him and, after standing for a few minutes without saying a word, he suddenly went away. The others then joined her. Elizabeth was filled with shame and annoyance. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, most unwise thing in the world! How shameful it must appear to a man who thought so highly of himself! It might seem as if she had purposely put herself in his way again. Oh! Why had she come? Or why did he come a day before he was expected? And his behaviour, so noticeably changed - what could it mean? It was astonishing that he should ever speak to her - but to speak with such politeness, to inquire after her family! Never in her life had she seen him so gentle. She did not know what to think.

	They now entered a beautiful walk by the water, but it was some time before Elizabeth could give it any attention, although she replied without thinking to the remarks of her companions. She greatly wished to know what was passing in Mr Darcy's mind, and whether, in spite of everything, she was still dear to him.

	After wandering on for some time quite slowly, because Mrs Gardiner was not a great walker and was becoming tired, they were again surprised by the sight of Mr Darcy approaching them. Elizabeth saw that he had lost none of his recent politeness, and to show that she too could be polite, she began to admire the place. But she had not got beyond the word "beautiful", when some unlucky thought reminded her that praise of Pemberley might be misunderstood. The colour in her face deepened, and she said no more.

	As she paused, he asked her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends. This was quite unexpected. 'What will be his surprise,' she thought, 'when he knows who they are? He thinks that they are people of social position.'

	The introduction, though, was made immediately, and as she named them as family relations of hers, she took a secret look at him to see how he bore it. It was plain that he was surprised, but instead of going away, he turned back with them and entered into conversation with Mr Gardiner. Elizabeth could not help being pleased. It was comforting that he should know that she had some relations of whom there was no need to be ashamed. She listened carefully, and felt happiness in every expression, every sentence of her uncle that showed his intelligence, his taste, or his good manners.

	The conversation soon turned to fishing, and she heard Mr Darcy, with the greatest politeness, invite him to fish there as often as he chose. Mrs Gardiner, who was walking arm in arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look of surprise. Elizabeth said nothing, but she was extremely pleased. The mark of attention must be all for herself.

	A little later, Mrs Gardiner, tired by the exercise of the morning, found Elizabeth's arm not strong enough to support her, and therefore preferred her husband's. Mr Darcy took her place by her niece. After a short silence, the lady spoke first. She wished him to know that she had been informed of his absence before she came to the place. He admitted that he had put forward his arrival because of some business. 'The rest of my party,' he continued, 'will be here tomorrow, and among them are some with whom you are acquainted - Mr Bingley and his sisters.'

	Elizabeth answered only by a slight lowering of her head.

	After a pause, he added: 'There is also a person who especially wishes to be known to you. Will you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to you?'

	The surprise of such a request was great - too great for her to remember later in what manner she agreed. They now walked on in silence. Elizabeth was not comfortable - that was impossible - but she was pleased by his attention.

	When Mr and Mrs Gardiner came up to them at the house, they were all urged to go inside and take some tea, but this was politely refused. Mr Darcy handed the ladies into the carriage, and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house.

	Her uncle and aunt now began to speak very favourably of his effect on them. They were cross with her, saying, 'Why did you tell us he was so disagreeable?'

	Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could.

	She then felt it her duty to tell them, in as careful a manner as she could, that she believed herself to have been mistaken in thinking that he had been at fault in his treatment of Wickham. Mrs Gardiner was surprised, but as they were now approaching the scenes of her youth, all her interest was soon taken up by the pleasures of her memories, and the meeting after many years of old friends, so Elizabeth was set free from awkward questions, and could be left with her own thoughts.



	CHAPTER NINETEEN

	The Bingleys

	Mr Darcy brought his sister to visit Elizabeth a few hours after her arrival the next day. The Gardiners were surprised again, and a new idea on the subject began to enter their heads.

	Elizabeth saw with astonishment that the young lady with whom she was now made acquainted was not extremely proud, as had been reported, but only extremely shy. The expression on her face showed sense and natural good temper, and her manners were perfectly gentle.

	They had not been together long before Bingley also came to call on Elizabeth. His manner was unchanged, and he looked and spoke with friendly confidence. To Mr and Mrs Gardiner, who knew what he meant to Jane, he was hardly a less interesting person than to herself. The whole party excited their attention. They were taken up in observing Mr Darcy and their niece. They remained a little in doubt about the lady's feelings, but it was clear that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration.

	Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wished to be agreeable to her visitors. She was watching Bingley with Miss Darcy, who had been put forward as a competitor to Jane. She saw nothing in the behaviour of either that gave support to the words of Miss Bingley. In a voice of real sadness, Bingley observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, that they had not met for eight months, not since 26 November, when they were all dancing together at Netherfield. Elizabeth was pleased that his memory was so exact. He later took an opportunity to ask her privately whether all her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question, but his look and manner gave it meaning.

	It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr Darcy himself, but when she did manage to look in his direction, she saw him doing his best to gain the good opinion of her relations, and when the visit came to an end, the wish was expressed of seeing them all at dinner at Pemberley two days later.

	It had been agreed between the aunt and the niece that such a striking piece of politeness as Miss Darcy's, in coming to see them on the very day of her arrival, ought to be returned, though it could not be equalled. It was therefore decided to call on her at Pemberley the following morning. Elizabeth was pleased, though when she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.

	When they reached the house, they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting with Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley and the lady with whom she lived in London. Georgiana's welcome was very shy, and might have given a false idea of pride, but Mrs Gardiner and her niece understood her difficulty and pitied her.

	Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley greeted them in few words, and when they were seated an awkward pause followed. It was broken by Miss Darcy's companion, a woman of good breeding, who carried on a conversation with Mrs Gardiner with some help from Elizabeth. Miss Darcy looked as if she wished for courage enough to join in.

	Elizabeth soon saw that she was closely watched by Miss Bingley. After a quarter of an hour, Miss Bingley inquired coldly after the health of her family, and Elizabeth replied just as coldly.

	Some servants then entered with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the finest fruits in season, and soon after that Mr Darcy, who had been fishing with Mr Gardiner, made his appearance.

	Elizabeth decided to appear perfectly calm and relaxed, especially when she realized that the suspicions of the whole party were causing close observation of every word, expression and movement from Darcy or herself. In no face was this so clearly expressed as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the smiles that spread over it when she addressed one of them. Jealousy had not yet made her give up hope, and she still planned to win Mr Darcy. But a little later, in an unwise moment of anger, she said with scornful politeness:

	'I believe, Miss Eliza, that the regiment has left Meryton. They must be a great loss to your family.'

	Elizabeth answered calmly, and while she spoke, she noticed that the colour in Darcy's face had deepened, and that his sister was full of confusion. Miss Bingley little knew what pain she was giving her friend. She had only intended to anger Elizabeth, and make her show some feeling that might harm her in Darcy's opinion. Elizabeth's self-control soon lessened his discomfort, and as Miss Bingley, annoyed and disappointed, dared not move any closer to the subject of Wickham, Georgiana, too, recovered in time.

	Their visit did not continue for long after this, and when Mr Darcy returned from walking them to their carriage, Miss Bingley was busy criticizing Elizabeth's appearance, behaviour and dress.

	'How very ugly Eliza Bennet looks this morning!' she cried. 'I have never in my life seen anyone so much changed as she is since the winter. She has become so brown and rough-looking. I must admit, though, that I could never see any beauty in her. Her features are not at all attractive, and as for her eyes, they have a sharp look to them.'

	As Miss Bingley believed that Mr Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not the best way of persuading him that he should prefer her, but angry people are not always wise. He looked annoyed, but remained silent, and from a determination to make him speak, she continued:

	'I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how you yourself said one night, after they had been having dinner at Netherfield, "She, a beauty! I should as soon call her mother a person of high intelligence!" But I believe you thought her rather pretty afterwards.'

	'Yes,' replied Darcy, who could no longer control himself. 'For many months I have considered her to be one of the best- looking women of my acquaintance.'

	In the carriage, as they returned to their hotel, Mrs Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had happened during their visit, except what particularly interested them both and the person who had attracted their attention most. They spoke of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit, of everything except himself! But Elizabeth was anxious to know what Mrs Gardiner thought of him, and Mrs Gardiner would have been extremely pleased if her niece had introduced the subject!



	CHAPTER TWENTY

	Lydia and Wickham

	Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not hearing from Jane on their arrival at Lambton, and this disappointment was renewed on both mornings that had now been spent there, but on the third her anxiety was relieved by receiving two letters together, of which the earlier one had been sent elsewhere because the address was not clearly written.

	Her aunt and uncle set out on a walk, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet. The earlier one had been written five days before, and began with an account of their little parties and social events and unimportant local news, but the second half, which was dated a day later, gave more important information. It said:

	Since writing yesterday, dearest Lizzy, something of a most unexpected and serious nature has happened. What I have to say concerns poor Lydia. An urgent message from Colonel Forster came at twelve last night, just as we had all gone to bed, to inform us that she had gone off to Scotland with one of his officers - to tell the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our surprise. But to Kitty it does not seem completely unexpected. I am very, very sorry. Such an unwise marriage on both sides! They went off on Saturday night at about twelve, but were not missed until yesterday morning. I must end this letter, because I cannot spend long away from my poor mother, who is sadly troubled. I am afraid that you will not be able to read this letter, for I hardly know what I have written.

	Without allowing herself time for consideration, Elizabeth immediately seized the other letter and, opening it with the greatest impatience, read as follows:

	By this time, my dearest sister, you will have received my hurried letter. I hope this will be clearer, but my head is so confused that I cannot be certain of it. Dearest Lizzy, I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed. Although a marriage between Mr Wickham and our poor Lydia would be very unwise, we are now anxious to be sure that the ceremony has actually been performed. Though Lydia left a short note for Mrs Forster giving her the idea that they were going to Gretna Green, something that Denny said showed his belief that Wickham never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all. This was repeated to Colonel Forster, who immediately became anxious and set out in search of them. He managed to follow their course, but only as far as London, where they have disappeared. After making every possible inquiry, he kindly came on to Longbourn and told us the bad news.

	Our anxiety, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My mother and father believe the worst has happened, but I cannot think so badly of Wickham. Perhaps they have some reason for being married privately in town. My poor mother is really ill, and as for my father, I never in my life saw him so troubled. Poor Kitty has to bear our parents' anger for having hidden the nature of their friendship, but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot be surprised that she did so. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been saved from some of these scenes, but now that the first shock is over, shall I admit that I greatly wish for your return? But I am not so unkind as to urge it, if it is inconvenient. My father is going to London immediately to try to discover Lydia, but the extreme state of his feelings will not allow him to act in the wisest way. At a time like this, my uncle's advice and help would be everything in the world.

	'Oh, where, where is my uncle?' cried Elizabeth, jumping from her seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him without loss of time. But as she reached the door, it was opened by a servant, and Mr Darcy appeared. Her pale face and hurried manner struck him immediately, and before he could recover from his surprise, she quickly said, 'I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find Mr Gardiner this moment on business that cannot be delayed.'

	'Oh, heavens! What is the matter?' he cried, with more feeling than politeness. Then, calming himself, he added, 'I will not keep you a minute, but let me, or let the servant, go after Mr Gardiner. You are not well enough. You cannot go yourself Elizabeth paused, but her knees trembled under her and, calling back the servant, she gave him the message. When he had left the room, she sat down, unable to support herself, and looked so ill and unhappy that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her, or to prevent himself from saying, in a voice of gentleness and sympathy, 'Let me call a woman for you. Is there nothing you could take to give yourself some relief? Shall I get you a glass of wine? You are very ill.'

	'No, I thank you,' she replied, trying to recover herself. 'I am quite well. I am only anxious about some terrible news from home.'

	She burst into tears as she mentioned it, and for a few minutes could not speak another word. Finally she went on, 'My youngest sister has left all her friends - has run away - has thrown herself into the power of - of Mr Wickham. She has no money, nothing that he could want - she is ruined forever.'

	Darcy stood still with astonishment.

	'When I consider,' Elizabeth added, 'that I might have prevented it! I, who knew what he really was. But it is too late!'

	Darcy quietly expressed his sympathy, and Elizabeth, in answer to his inquiries, told him what details she knew. He hardly seemed to hear her, and was walking up and down in deep thought, with a serious and troubled expression on his face. Elizabeth immediately understood. Her power over him was sinking under such a proof of family weakness, such a certainty of the deepest dishonour. She could neither blame him, nor feel any surprise, but the situation was exactly of a kind to make her understand her own wishes, and she had never so honestly felt that she could have loved him as now, when all love must be without hope.

	But her own troubles were soon swallowed up in the memory of Lydia and, covering her face with her hands, she was soon lost to everything else. After a pause of several minutes, she was brought back to the present situation by the voice of her companion, who said, 'This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister's having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley today.'

	'Oh, yes! Please be kind enough to apologize for us to Miss Darcy. Say that urgent business calls us home. Hide the truth as long as possible.'

	He agreed to do so and, with only one serious parting look, went away. As he left the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they should ever see each other again in such a friendly way. Looking back over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of differences and variety, she felt saddened at the awkward change in her feelings, which would now have encouraged its continuance, and would formerly have been glad at its ending.

	If grateful feelings and respect form part of love, Elizabeth's change of feelings will be considered neither improbable nor faulty. The fact is certain that she saw him go with sadness and found additional pain in this early example of what Lydia's behaviour must produce. She had no hope of Wickham meaning to marry her sister. She had never noticed, while the regiment was in Meryton, that Lydia had any special liking for him, but she was sure that Lydia only needed encouragement to form a strong relationship with anybody. Sometimes one officer, sometimes another had been her favourite. Though she did not suppose Lydia to be purposely running away without the intention of marriage, she believed that she would easily be tricked by a deceitful man.

	Mr and Mrs Gardiner had hurried back, worried, and Elizabeth told them the cause of her message. Although Lydia had never been a favourite with them, they could not help being deeply shocked. After they had expressed their feelings of sympathy, Mr Gardiner promised every help that it was in his power to give, and everything concerning their journey was speedily arranged.

	'But what is to be done about Pemberley?' cried Mrs Gardiner.

	'I told Mr Darcy that we should not be able to go there tonight. That is all settled.'

	'What is all settled?' repeated Mrs Gardiner to herself, as she ran to her room to get herself ready for travelling. 'And do they know each other so well that she can tell him the real truth? How I wish that I knew!'

	Packing had to be done, and notes had to be written to all their friends in Lambton, with excuses for their leaving so suddenly. An hour, though, was enough to complete everything, and at the end of that hour Elizabeth found herself seated in the carriage, on the road to Longbourn.



	CHAPTER TWENTY ONE

	Mr Gardiner Goes to London

	They travelled as quickly as possible, and, having slept one night on the way, reached Longbourn by dinnertime the next day.

	The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of the carriage, were standing on the steps of the house, and the joyful surprise that lit up their faces was the travellers' first welcome.

	Elizabeth jumped out, gave each of them a quick kiss, and hurried into the hall, where Jane, who came running downstairs from her mother's room, met her immediately.

	As Elizabeth greeted her warmly, tears filled the eyes of both sisters. The younger, though, did not lose a moment before asking whether anything had been heard of the missing pair.

	'Not yet,' replied Jane.

	'Is our father in town?'

	'Yes, he went on Tuesday.'

	'And have you heard from him often?'

	'Only once, to say that he had arrived and to give me his address. He only added that he would not write again until he had something important to mention.'

	'And our mother - how is she?'

	'Fairly well, though her nerves are troubling her a great deal, and she is still in bed. Mary and Kitty, thank heaven, are quite well.'

	'But you - how are you?' cried Elizabeth. 'You look pale. How much you must have suffered!'

	Her sister told her that she was perfectly well, and their conversation, which had been continued while Mr and Mrs Gardiner were with their children, was now ended by the approach of the whole party.

	Mrs Bennet, to whose room they all went, received them exactly as might be expected, with tears and expressions of sadness, angry words against Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings. She blamed everybody but the person who, by bringing up her daughter so carelessly, was chiefly responsible for her faults.

	'If I had been able,' she said, 'to go to Brighton with all my family, this would never have happened - but poor dear Lydia had no one to look after her. Poor dear child! And now here's Mr Bennet gone away, and I know he'll fight Wickham, and then he'll be killed, and what will become of us all? The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold in his grave and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we shall do.'

	They all comforted her against such terrible ideas, and Mr Gardiner told her that he would go directly to London and give Mr Bennet every help in his search.

	'Oh, my dear brother,' replied Mrs Bennet, 'that is exactly what I could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them, wherever they may be, and if they are not already married, make them marry. And as for clothes for the wedding, do not let them wait for that, but tell Lydia that she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them, after they are married. And above all things, keep Mr Bennet from fighting. Tell him what a terrible state I am in - that I am frightened to death, and have such tremblings all over me, and such pains in my head, and such beatings of my heart that I can get no rest by night or by day. And tell my dear Lydia not to give any orders about her clothes until she has seen me, because she does not know the best shops. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I know that you will manage everything.'

	Mr Gardiner could not avoid advising her not to be extreme, in her hopes as well as her fears, and the conversation continued in this manner until dinner was on the table and they left her to the attentions of the housekeeper.

	Although Mr and Mrs Gardiner were sure that there was no real necessity for her to stay in bed, they did not attempt to oppose her desire, because they knew that she had not enough good sense to keep quiet while the servants were around.

	They were joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been too busy in their separate rooms to make their appearance before. The one came from her books, the other from the business of dressing herself. They were both fairly calm, and no change was noticeable in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger which she herself had had to bear in the matter, had made Kitty more complaining than usual.

	In the afternoon, the two older Misses Bennet were able to have half an hour by themselves in serious talk. Elizabeth learnt that Wickham's bad character had begun to be known. Colonel Forster believed him to be a careless and wasteful spender, and it was now said that he had left Meryton greatly in debt.

	'Oh, Jane, if we had been less secretive, if we had told what we knew of him, this could not have happened.'

	'We acted with the best intentions.'

	Jane then showed Elizabeth Lydia's letter to Mrs Forster, which the Colonel had brought with him. This is what it contained:

	My dear Harriet,

	You will laugh when you know where I have gone, and I cannot help laughing myself at your surprise tomorrow morning, as soon as I am missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with whom, I shall think you very stupid, because there is only one man in the world that I love, and he is perfect. I could never be happy without him, so I think it will do no harm to run away with him. You need not tell them at Longbourn if you do not want to, because it will make the surprise much greater when I write to them and sign my name Lydia Wickham. What a good joke it will be! Please make my excuses to Pratt for not keeping my promise to dance with him tonight. I shall send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn, but I wish you would tell the servant to mend a great hole in my blue dress before it is packed. Goodbye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope that you will drink to our good journey.

	Your loving friend, LYDIA BENNET.

	'Oh, thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!' cried Elizabeth when she had finished reading. 'What a letter this is to be written at such a moment! But at least it shows that she was serious in the object of her journey. My poor father! How he must have felt!'

	'I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for fully ten minutes. Our mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house was in confusion.'

	'Oh, Jane,' cried Elizabeth,' was there one servant belonging to us who did not know the whole story before the end of the day?'

	'I do not know. I hope so. But it is very difficult to be careful at such a time.'

	'You do not look well. You have had every care and anxiety to bear by yourself.'

	'Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared every duty, I am sure, but Kitty is thin and delicate, and Mary studies so much that she should not be interrupted during her hours of rest. Our Aunt Philips came to us after our father had gone away, and was of great use and comfort, and Lady Lucas has been very kind, and walked over here to offer her sympathy and help.'

	'It would have been better if she had stayed at home,' cried Elizabeth. 'Perhaps she meant well, but in a time of such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too little of one's neighbours.'



	CHAPTER TWENTY TWO

	Mr Bennet Returns

	All Meryton now seemed eager to speak badly of the man who, only three months before, had been considered to be the perfect gentleman. He was said to be in debt to every shopkeeper in the place, and to have made love to most of their daughters. Everybody spoke of him as the worst young man in the world, and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness.

	Mrs Philips visited the Bennets frequently with the intention, she said, of cheering them up, but as she never came without reporting some fresh example of his wrongdoings, she rarely went away without leaving them in lower spirits than she had found them.

	Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety, but the most anxious part of each was when the post was expected. Still no news of any importance came from London, but a letter arrived for their father from a different direction, from Mr Collins. As Jane had been told by Mr Bennet to open everything that came for him in his absence, she read it, and Elizabeth, who knew how strange Mr Collins's letters always were, looked over her shoulder and read it too.

	My dear Sir,

	I feel it is my duty, as a relative of yours, and because of my situation in life, to sympathize with you in your present misfortune, which must be of the bitterest kind, since it stems from a cause that no time can remove. The death of your daughter would have been a relief in comparison with this. It is all the worse, because I understand there is reason to suppose that this behaviour of your daughter was caused by a lack of rules at home, though at the same time I suspect that her character must be naturally bad. In any case, you are greatly to be pitied, in which opinion I am joined not only by my wife, but also by Lady Catherine and her daughter. They agree with me that this foolish act will harm the fortunes of all your other daughters, for who will connect themselves with such a family? This consideration leads me to think with increased satisfaction of a certain event of last November, for if it had been otherwise, I should have shared all your sorrow and shame. Let me advise you, my dear sir, to throw off your ungrateful child forever, and leave her to the fruits of her wrongdoings.

	I am, dear sir, etc.

	At last, after the failure of all attempts to find his daughter, Mr Bennet agreed to Mr Gardiner's request that he should return to his family and leave it to him to do whatever seemed advisable. When Mrs Bennet was told of this, she did not express as much satisfaction as her children expected.

	'What! Is he coming home, and without poor Lydia? Who is to fight Wickham and make him marry her, if he comes away?'

	As Mrs Gardiner began to wish to be at home, she and her children left in the carriage that would bring Mr Bennet back to Longbourn. She went away still as confused as ever about Elizabeth and her Derbyshire friend.

	When Mr Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual calmness. He said as little as ever, and made no mention of the business that had taken him away, and it was some time before his daughters had the courage to speak of it.

	It was not until the afternoon, when he joined them at tea, that Elizabeth dared to introduce the subject, and in answer to her expressions of sympathy, he said, 'Say nothing of that. It is right that I should suffer. It has been my own doing, and I ought to feel it.'

	Then he continued, 'Lizzy, I have no bad feelings towards you for being right in your advice to me last May'

	They were interrupted by Jane, who came to collect her mother's tea.

	'This is a ceremony,' he cried, 'which does me good! Another day I will behave as your mother does. I will sit in the library, and give as much trouble as I can - or perhaps I can delay it until Kitty runs away.'

	'I am not going to run away, Father,' said Kitty. 'If I should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia.'

	'You go to Brighton! I will not trust you anywhere near it, not for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at least learnt to be careful, and you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter this house again, or even to pass through the village. Balls are completely forbidden, unless you dance with one of your sisters. And you are never to go out of doors until you can prove that you have spent ten minutes of every day in a sensible manner.'

	Kitty, who took all these threats seriously, began to cry.

	'Well, well,' he said, 'do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good girl for the next ten years, I will take you to the theatre at the end of them.'



	CHAPTER TWENTY THREE

	Lydia and Wickham Are Found

	Two days after Mr Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking in the garden behind the house, they saw the housekeeper coming towards them.

	'I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting you,' she said to Jane, 'but I was hoping that you might have had good news from town, and I dared to come and ask.'

	'What do you mean? We have heard nothing from town.'

	'Dear madam,' cried the housekeeper, 'don't you know that an urgent letter came from Mr Gardiner half an hour ago?'

	The girls ran away, too eager to reach the house to have time for speech. They ran through the hall into the breakfast room, and from there to the library. Their father was in neither. They were on the point of looking for him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by a manservant, who said:

	'If you are looking for my master, madam, he is walking towards the little wood.'

	They immediately left the house again, and ran across the grass after their father. Jane, who was not so light as Elizabeth, soon slowed down, while her sister, out of breath, reached him and eagerly cried out:

	'Oh, Father, what news? Good or bad?'

	'What good is to be expected?' he said, taking the letter from his pocket. 'But perhaps you would like to read it.'

	Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up and joined them.

	'Read it out loud,' said their father. Elizabeth read:

	GRACECHURCH STREET Monday, August 2nd

	My dear brother,

	At last I am able to send you some news. I have discovered my niece and the young man. They are not married, and I do not believe that they ever intended to be, but if you are willing to keep the promises that I have been forced to make in your name, I hope it will not be long before they are. All that is necessary is that you should settle on your daughter, by law, her equal share of the five thousand pounds that will come to your children after the death of yourself and my sister, and, in addition, that you should enter into an agreement to allow her, during your life, one hundred pounds a year. Mr Wickham's condition as regards money is not so hopeless as was believed, and I am happy to say that there will be a little of his own money left, even when his debts have been paid. There is not the smallest necessity for you to come to town, as I will give your lawyer all details about making the agreement. Send back your answer as soon as you can. We have judged it best that my niece should be married from this house, and I hope you will approve.

	Yours, etc.

	EDWARD GARDINER.

	'And have you answered the letter?'

	'I dislike it very much,' he replied, 'but it must be done.'

	He turned back with them, and walked towards the house.

	'And may I ask something?' said Elizabeth. 'The conditions must, I suppose, be agreed to?'

	'Agreed to? I am only ashamed of his asking so little.'

	'And they must marry! Even though he is such a man!'

	'Yes, yes, there is nothing else to be done. But there are two things that I very much want to know - one is, how much money your uncle has paid out to arrange this, and the other, how I am ever going to pay him back.'

	'Money! My uncle!' cried Jane. 'What do you mean, sir?'

	'I mean that no man in his right mind would marry Lydia for so little as one hundred pounds a year.'

	'That is very true,' said Elizabeth, 'though I had not thought of it before. His debts will be paid, and something will still remain! Oh, it must be my uncle's doing. Generous, good man! A small sum could not do all this.'

	'No,' said her father, 'Wickham's a fool if he takes her with a penny less than ten thousand pounds.'

	'Ten thousand pounds! How is half such a sum to be repaid?'

	Mr Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued to walk in silence until they reached the house. Their father then went to the library to write.

	'And they are really to be married!' cried Elizabeth, as soon as she and Jane were by themselves. 'How strange this is! Although their chance of happiness is small, and his character is worthless, we are forced to be glad! Oh, Lydia!'

	The girls now remembered that their mother probably knew nothing of what had happened. They went, therefore, and asked their father's permission to tell her. Without raising his head from his writing, he replied coldly:

	'Just as you please.'

	'May we take my uncle's letter to read to her?'

	'Take whatever you like, and get away.'

	After a slight warning of good news, the letter was read to Mrs Bennet. Their mother could hardly control herself. Her joy burst out after the first few sentences. She had no fears for her daughter's happiness, nor shame from any memory of her misbehaviour.

	'This is so exciting!' she cried. 'She will be married at sixteen! How I wish to see her and dear Wickham too! But the clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about them directly. Ring the bell, Kitty, for the servant. I will dress in a moment. I will go to Meryton as soon as I am dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I am coming back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs Long.'

	She then began to tell the news to the servant, who expressed her joy. Elizabeth received her congratulations with the rest, and then, sick of this foolishness, went to her own room so that she could think in peace.



	CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR

	Mr Bennet Agrees to Their Marriage

	Mr Bennet had often wished, before this period in his life, that instead of spending his whole income, he had saved a yearly sum to provide for his children - and his wife, if she lived longer than he did. He now wished this more than ever. If he had done his duty in that matter, Lydia need not have depended on her uncle for whatever respectability could now be bought for her.

	When Mr Bennet first married, saving was considered to be perfectly useless, for of course they would have a son. The son would, as heir, be willing at the age of twenty-one to make more suitable arrangements for the property, so that the wife and other children would be provided for. Five daughters, one after another, entered the world, but the son still did not come. They had, at last, given up hope, but it was then too late to begin saving. Mrs Bennet was naturally careless about money, and only her husband's love of independence prevented them from spending more than their income.

	Five thousand pounds had been settled by marriage agreement on Mrs Bennet and her children, but the share that the children would receive depended on the wishes of the parents. This was one point, with regard to Lydia at least, which could now be settled, and Mr Bennet immediately accepted the proposal of his wife's brother. He had never supposed that the affair could have been arranged with so little inconvenience to himself. He would hardly be ten pounds poorer after hundred was paid each year to the young pair, because the cost of keeping Lydia at home - her pocket money, and the continual presents in money which passed to her through her mother's hands - amounted to very little less than that sum.

	He wrote, therefore, to give his agreement and thanks to Mr Gardiner, but was too angry with Lydia to send any message to her.

	It was two weeks since Mrs Bennet had last been downstairs, but on this happy day she again took her seat at the head of the table, and in extremely high spirits. No feeling of shame caused her joy to be lessened. Her thoughts ran completely on clothes, carriages, servants, and a large enough house for Lydia. Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the servants remained. But when they had gone, he said to her, 'Mrs Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your daughter, understand that she shall never have admittance into this one, at least.'

	A long argument followed this statement, but Mr Bennet was firm. It soon led to another, and Mrs Bennet found, with astonishment and shock, that her husband would not give one penny to buy clothes for her daughter. He declared that she should receive no sign of love whatever from him on the occasion. Mrs Bennet was more troubled by the shame of Lydia's lack of new clothes than the shame of the conditions which had made her marriage necessary.

	Elizabeth was now deeply sorry that she had, in her unhappiness at the moment, made known to Mr Darcy her fears for her sister, since now Lydia's marriage would hide her earlier fault from all those who were not closely connected with the affair. She knew that she could trust him to keep the secret, but at the same time she was ashamed and full of sorrow that he, of all people, should know of her family's shame.

	She felt sure that his wish to gain her respect would be destroyed by such a blow as this. She became desirous of his good opinion, when she could no longer hope to have the advantage of it. She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance of receiving information. She was quite sure now that she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely that they would meet.

	What a victory for him, as she often thought, if he could only know that the proposals which she had so proudly scorned only four months ago would now have been gladly and gratefully received!

	She began to realize that he was exactly the man who, in character and ability, would most suit her. It was a union that would have been to the advantage of both. By her confidence and liveliness, his mind might have been softened and his manners improved, and from his judgment, information and knowledge of the world, she would have received advantages of greater importance.

	***

	The day of their sister's wedding arrived, and Jane and Elizabeth had urged their father so seriously but so gently to receive her and her husband at Longbourn after the event that he was at last persuaded to act as they wished. It would only be for a short time, as a move had been arranged for Wickham to another regiment stationed in the north of England, where he could make a fresh start in life.

	The carriage was sent to meet them, and they were to return in it by dinnertime. Their arrival was expected by the two older Misses Bennet with a mixture of discomfort and anxiety.

	They came. The family were waiting in the breakfast room to receive them. Smiles covered the face of Mrs Bennet as the carriage drove up to the door. Her husband looked serious, and her daughters anxious and nervous.

	Lydia's voice was heard in the hall. The door was thrown open, and she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forward, kissed her, and welcomed her with joy, giving her hand with a warm smile to Wickham, who followed his lady.

	Their welcome by Mr Bennet, to whom they then turned, was colder. His face became even more serious, and he hardly moved his lips. The easy confidence of the young pair was enough to anger him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Jane was shocked. Lydia was still Lydia, uncontrolled, unashamed, wild, noisy, fearless. She turned from one sister to another, demanding their congratulations, while Wickham was all smiles and easy politeness. Neither Lydia nor her mother could talk fast enough.

	'To think that it has been three months,' cried Lydia, 'since I went away! I am sure that I had no idea of being married before I came back, though I thought it would be very good fun if I was.'

	Her father lifted his eyes, and Elizabeth looked expressively at her, but she continued brightly, 'Oh, mother, do the people at Meryton know I am married today? I was afraid they might not, so as we came through I let my hand rest on the window frame of the carriage, so that they could see the ring.'

	As they passed through the hall to the dining room, Lydia, with anxious importance, walked up to her mother's right hand, and said to her oldest sister, 'Ah, Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a married woman.'

	'Well, mother,' she said, after the meal, 'what do you think of my husband? Is he not a fine-looking man? I am sure that my sisters must all be jealous of me. I only hope that they may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the place to get husbands. Or you must all come and see us in the north. I expect that there will be some dances, and I will take care to get good partners for my sisters. And then, when you go away, you may leave one or two of them behind, and I am sure that I shall get husbands for them before the winter is over.'

	'I thank you for your advice,' said Elizabeth, 'but I do not especially like your way of getting husbands.'

	Wickham's love for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected it to be - not equal to Lydia's for him. She guessed that their running away together had been caused by the strength of her love rather than by his, and that escape from his debts had been the main reason for his leaving Brighton, though he was not the kind of young man to refuse the opportunity of having a companion.

	Lydia was extremely fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every occasion. No one could be compared with him. He did everything best in the world.

	One morning soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two oldest sisters, she said to Elizabeth:

	'Lizzy, I never gave you an account of my wedding. You were not present when I told the others. Are you not interested in hearing how it was managed?'

	'No, really,' replied Elizabeth, 'I think there cannot be too little said on the subject.'

	'Oh! How strange you are! But I must tell you how it happened. Well, the day came, and I was so excited! I was so afraid, you know, that something would happen to delay it. And there was my aunt, all the time that I was dressing, talking away just as if she were a minister in church. But I did not hear a word of it, because I was thinking about whether my dear Wickham would be married in his blue coat. Well, and just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away on business. I was so frightened that I did not know what to do, because my uncle was to act in place of my father at the ceremony, and give me in marriage, and if we were late we could not be married all day. But I remembered afterwards that it need not have been delayed, because Mr Darcy might have taken his place.'

	'Mr Darcy!' repeated Elizabeth in astonishment.

	'Oh, yes! He came there with Wickham, you know. But heavens! I quite forgot! I promised not to mention it. It was a secret.'

	'In that case,' said Elizabeth, although she was burning with a desire to know more, 'we will ask you no questions.'

	'Thank you,' said Lydia, 'because if you did, I should certainly tell you all, and then Wickham would be so angry.'

	With such encouragement, Elizabeth was forced to help her sister keep her secret by leaving the room.

	But it was impossible not to ask for information on this matter. Mr Darcy had been at her sister's wedding! What could be the reason? Seizing a sheet of paper, she wrote a short letter to her aunt to request an explanation, if it could be given without breaking confidence. 'And if it cannot,' she added at the end of the letter,' and if you do not tell me in an honourable manner, my dear aunt, I shall certainly be forced to use some trick to find out!'

	Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an immediate answer to her letter. As soon as she was in possession of it, she hurried off to the little wood, where she was least likely to be interrupted.

	GRACECHURCH STREET September 6th

	My dear niece,

	I have just received your letter and must admit to being surprised by your request. Don't think me angry, though, because I only mean that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on your side. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am, and nothing but the belief of your involvement in the affair would have allowed him to act as he has done. But if you really know nothing of the matter, I must give you an explanation.

	On the same day as my return from Longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visit from Mr Darcy, who talked with him in private for several hours. He came to tell Mr Gardiner that he had found out where your sister and Mr Wickham were, and that he had talked to them. From what I can understand, he left Derbyshire only one day after ourselves, and came to town with the intention of hunting for them. He generously gave as a reason for this that he felt himself responsible for the whole situation, because he had not made public in Meryton last year his knowledge of Wickham's worthlessness. He blamed his own pride for this.

	It seems that there is a lady who was formerly a private teacher to Miss Darcy and who was dismissed for some good reason that he did not mention. She had then rented a house in London and supported herself by letting rooms. Knowing that she had been friendly with Mr Wickham, Darcy went to her, and succeeded with some difficulty in getting his address. He first tried to persuade Lydia to leave her shameful situation and return to her friends, but he found her determined to remain where she was. She was sure that Wickham would marry her sometime or other, and it did not much matter when. The gentleman himself, it appeared, had no such intention. He still hoped to make his fortune by a good marriage in some other place. But an agreement was at last reached which was satisfactory to both sides.

	Our visitor, Darcy, refused every attempt by Mr Gardiner to share these responsibilities. Nothing was done that he did not do himself, though I am sure that your uncle would most willingly have settled the whole matter. They argued over it together for a long time, but at last your uncle was forced to agree. Wickham's debts will be paid, another thousand pounds will be settled on her, and a good position in the army will be obtained for him.

	There may be some truth in the reasons given by Mr Darcy for acting so generously, but in spite of all this fine talk, my dear Lizzy, you may be sure that your uncle would never have agreed if we had not believed him to have another interest in the affair. Will you be very angry if I take this opportunity of saying how much I like him? His behaviour, his understanding and opinions all please me, and he only lacks a little liveliness, and that, if he marries the right person, his wife may teach him. I thought him very secretive. He hardly ever mentioned your name. But secrecy seems to be the fashion. Please forgive me if I have said too much, or at least do not punish me so far as to forbid me to visit you at P.

	But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me for the last half-hour.

	Your loving aunt, M. GARDINER.

	The information in this letter unsettled Elizabeths spirits. Darcy had done all this for a woman whom he must scorn and the man whom he most wished to avoid! Her heart did whisper that he had done it for her. Oh, how sorry she was for every unkind feeling that she had ever encouraged towards him! For herself, she felt ashamed and small, but she was proud of him - proud that in a cause of honour he could defeat his own nature. She read over her aunt's praise of him again and again. It was hardly enough, but it pleased her.



	CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE

	Return to Netherfield

	The day soon arrived when the young pair had to leave, and Mrs Bennet was forced to bear the separation.

	'Write to me often, my dear Lydia,' she cried.

	'As often as I can, but married women never have much time for writing. My sisters may write to me. They will have nothing else to do.'

	Mr Wickham's goodbyes were much warmer than his wife's. He smiled a lot and said many pretty things.

	As soon as he was out of the house, Mr Bennet said bitterly: 'He is as fine a young man as ever I saw. He smiles sweetly, and makes love to us all. I am extremely proud of him. Even Sir William Lucas could not produce a better husband for his daughter.'

	The loss of Lydia made Mrs Bennet very dull for several days, but her spiritless condition was relieved soon afterwards by a piece of news which then began to be passed round. The housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her master. Mrs Bennet was quite unsettled. She looked at Jane, and smiled and shook her head.

	Jane had not been able to hear of his arrival without trembling a little, and Elizabeth could easily see that it had had an effect on her spirits. Elizabeth herself was confused by the visit. Had he come with his friend's permission, or was he brave enough to act without it?

	'I am beginning to be sorry that he is coming at all,' said Jane to Elizabeth a few days later. 'It would be nothing, I could see him with complete lack of interest, but I can hardly bear to hear it continually talked about. My mother means well, but she does not know how I suffer from what she says.'

	Mr Bingley arrived. On the third morning after his coming, Mrs Bennet saw him from her dressing-room window as he rode towards the house.

	Her daughters were eagerly called on to share her joy. Jane firmly stayed at her place at the table, but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the window.

	She looked, saw Mr Darcy with him, and sat down again by her sister.

	'There is a gentleman with Mr Bingley, Mama,' said Kitty. 'It looks like that tall, proud man, who used to be with him before - I've forgotten his name.'

	'Oh, heavens! Mr Darcy! Well, I must say that I hate the sight of him.'

	Both Elizabeth and Jane were uncomfortable, but the former had a cause for discomfort which could not be guessed by Jane, to whom she had never yet had the courage to show Mrs Gardiner's letter, or to tell of her own change of feeling. Her astonishment at his coming and wishing to see her again was almost as great as she had experienced when she had first observed his changed behaviour in Derbyshire. Her face, which had become pale for half a minute, now found its colour again with an additional warmth, and a smile of pleasure added brightness to her eyes, as she thought that his love and wishes must still be unchanged - but she could not be sure.

	She sat busily at work, trying not to appear excited. Jane looked a little paler than usual. When the gentlemen appeared, she received them fairly calmly. Elizabeth said as little as politeness would allow, and sat again at her work. She had dared to take only one look at Darcy. He looked serious as usual.

	Bingley, she saw, was both pleased and confused. He was received by Mrs Bennet with an amount of attention which made her two oldest daughters feel ashamed, especially when it was compared with the cold and ceremonious politeness of her behaviour to his friend. Elizabeth especially, who knew what her mother owed to Mr Darcy.

	Darcy said hardly anything to her. He was not seated by her, so perhaps that was the reason for his silence. When sometimes, unable to prevent it, she raised her eyes to his face, she found him looking at Jane quite as often as at herself. She was disappointed, and angry with herself for being so.

	At this time Mrs Bennet was talking to Bingley happily about Lydia's marriage, and receiving his congratulations.

	'It is a satisfying thing, to be sure, to have a daughter married,' Mrs Bennet continued, 'but at the same time it is very hard to have her taken away from me. Her husband has been moved to another regiment, you know. Thank heavens he has some friends, though not, perhaps, as many as he deserves.'

	Elizabeth, who knew that this was directed against Mr Darcy, thought that she could now feel no greater shame. But her discomfort soon received relief from seeing how much the beauty of her sister was bringing back the admiration of her former lover, who seemed to be giving her more and more of his attention.

	When the gentlemen rose to go, they were invited to eat at Longbourn in a few days' time.

	***

	As soon as they had gone, Elizabeth walked in the garden to recover her spirits. Mr Darcy's behaviour astonished and confused her. She could explain it in no way that gave her pleasure.

	'Why did he come at all, if it was only to be silent and serious? If he fears me, why come here? If he no longer cares for me, why be silent? Annoying man! I will think no more about him.'

	Her sister approached, and joined her with a cheerful smile.

	'Now,' she said, 'that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly relaxed. I am glad that he will eat here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly seen that we meet only as ordinary and uninterested acquaintances.'

	'Very uninterested!' said Elizabeth laughingly. 'I think that you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with you as ever.'

	They did not see the gentlemen again until Tuesday, when there was a large party at Longbourn. As the two men entered the dining room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take the place which, at all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her careful mother, having the same idea, did not invite him to sit by herself. He seemed to pause, but Jane looked round and smiled. It was decided. He placed himself beside her.

	Elizabeth, with a feeling of victory, looked towards his friend. He bore it well, and she would have imagined that Bingley had received his permission to be happy, if she had not seen his eyes turned towards Mr Darcy with an expression of anxiety.

	His behaviour towards her sister during dinner showed such admiration that Elizabeth believed that, if left completely to himself, Jane's happiness, and his own, would be speedily gained.

	Mr Darcy was on one side of her mother. She knew how little such a situation could give pleasure to either. She was not near enough to hear any of their conversation, but she could see how rarely they spoke to each other, and how formal and cold their manner was whenever they did.

	She hoped that the evening would provide some opportunity of bringing herself and Mr Darcy together. Anxious and uncomfortable, the period which passed in the sitting room before the gentlemen came in was tiring and dull.

	The gentlemen came, and she thought that he looked as if he would have answered her hopes, but oh! The ladies had crowded so closely round the table, where Jane was making tea and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee, that there was not a single space near her where a chair could be placed. He walked away to another part of the room.

	She was a little cheered, though, by his bringing back his coffee cup himself, and she seized the opportunity to inquire after his sister. He replied, and then stood beside her for some minutes in silence.

	When the tea things had been removed, and the card tables placed, they were seated far from each other, at different games, and she lost every expectation of pleasure. Mrs Bennet was in high spirits when the guests had gone.

	'Well, girls,' she said, as soon as they were left to themselves, 'I think everything passed off uncommonly well. The dinner was as well-cooked as any I ever saw. The meat was cooked to perfection. The soup was 50 times better than that we had at the Lucases' last week. And, my dear Jane, what do you think Mrs Long said? "Ah, Mrs Bennet, we shall have her at Netherfield at last!" I do think that Mrs Long is as good a woman as ever lived - and her nieces are very well-behaved girls, and not at all good- looking. I like them very much.'

	***

	A few days later, Mr Bingley called again, and alone. His friend had left that morning for London, but would return in ten days' time. He sat with them for over an hour, and was in noticeably good spirits. Mrs Bennet invited him to dinner with them, but unfortunately he had another engagement. He eagerly accepted an invitation, though, for the following day.

	He came, and so early that none of the ladies was dressed. Mrs Bennet ran into her daughter's room with her hair half-finished, crying out:

	'My dear Jane, hurry down. He has come. Hurry, hurry.'

	'We shall be down as soon as we can,' said Jane, 'but I dare say that Kitty will be ready before either of us.'

	'Oh, never mind about Kitty! What has she to do with it? Come, be quick!'

	The same anxiety to get Jane and Mr Bingley by themselves was plain again in the evening. After tea, Mr Bennet went to the library, as was his custom, and Mary went upstairs to her piano. Two of the five being removed, Mrs Bennet sat making signals with her eyes at Elizabeth and Kitty for some time, without having any effect on them. Elizabeth did not take any notice, and when at last Kitty did, she said in surprise, 'What is the matter, Mother? Is something wrong? What should I do?'

	'Nothing, child, nothing.'

	Five minutes later, she suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, 'Come here, my love, I want to speak to you,' took her out of the room. A look from Jane begged Elizabeth to remain, but when, some moments later, the door half opened and her mother called out that she wanted her, she was forced to go.

	Her mother announced her intention of sitting upstairs, and as soon as she was out of sight, Elizabeth returned to the sitting room.

	Bingley was everything a gentleman should be for the rest of the evening. He bore all Mrs Bennet's silly remarks with the greatest patience. After this day, Jane said no more about being uninterested. Elizabeth believed that all must speedily be brought to a successful ending, unless Mr Darcy returned too soon. She felt, though, that all this must be happening with that gentleman's approval.

	Bingley spent the next morning shooting with Mr Bennet, and returned with him to dinner. After the meal Elizabeth had a letter to write and, believing that the others were all going to sit down together to cards, she went to her own room.

	But on returning to the sitting room, she found that her mother had again been arranging matters. Her sister and Bingley were standing together by the fireplace as if in serious conversation, and the faces of both, as they quickly turned and moved away from each other, told everything. Not a word was said by either, and Elizabeth in her confusion was just going away again, when Bingley suddenly whispered a few words to her sister, and ran out of the room.

	Jane could have no secrets from Elizabeth, and immediately admitted that she was the happiest being in the world. Elizabeth's congratulations were given with sincerity and pleasure. Jane then ran to her mother.

	In a few minutes Elizabeth was joined by Mr Bingley, whose conversation with Mr Bennet had been short and successful. He claimed her good wishes and love as a sister, and they shook hands with great pleasure.

	It was an evening of excitement for them all. Jane's happiness made her look more beautiful than ever. Kitty smiled, and hoped that her turn was coming soon. Mrs Bennet could not express her feelings often enough, and when Mr Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed how happy he was. Not a word passed his lips about it until his visitor had gone.

	He then turned to his daughter and said:

	'Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.' Jane went to him, kissed him, and thanked him for his goodness.

	'You are a good girl,' he replied, 'and I have no doubt that you will suit each other. You are each so ready to give way to the other that nothing will ever be decided on; so trusting that every servant will cheat you, and so generous that you will always spend more than your income.'

	'Spend more than their income!' cried his wife. 'My dear Mr Bennet, what are you talking of? He has four or five thousand pounds a year, and very likely more.' Then, addressing her daughter, 'Oh, my dear, dear Jane, I am so happy! I am sure that I shall not get a moment's sleep tonight. I knew that you could not be so beautiful for nothing. Oh, he is the best-looking young man that ever was seen!'

	Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was at that moment her favourite child, and she cared for no other.

	Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn. The situation could not remain a secret for long. Mrs Bennet whispered it to Mrs Philips, who passed on the news without permission to all her neighbours. The Bennets were spoken of as the luckiest family in the world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had run away, they had been generally believed to be the most unfortunate.



	CHAPTER TWENTY SIX

	Lady Catherine Visits Longbourn

	One morning, about a week later, a carriage suddenly appeared outside the house. It was too early for visitors, and neither the carriage nor the uniform of the servant was familiar. The two lovers immediately escaped to the garden, leaving the rest of the ladies to guess who the stranger could be, until the door was thrown open and Lady Catherine de Bourgh entered.

	She walked in, looking more disagreeable than usual, made no other reply to Elizabeth's greeting than a slight movement of the head, and sat down without a word.

	After sitting for a moment in silence, she said, very stiffly, to Elizabeth:

	'I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your mother?'

	Elizabeth replied shortly that she was.

	'And that, I suppose, is one of your sisters?'

	'Yes, madam,' replied Mrs Bennet, to whom Elizabeth had mentioned the visitor's name, and who was feeling highly honoured by her coming.

	'You have a very small park here,' observed Lady Catherine, after a short silence, 'and this must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening in summer. The windows appear to be facing west.'

	Mrs Bennet informed her that they never sat there after dinner, and then added:

	'May I ask whether you left Mr and Mrs Collins well?'

	'Yes, very well.'

	Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from Charlotte, because it seemed the only likely reason for her visit. But no letter appeared, and she could not understand the visit at all.

	Mrs Bennet, with great politeness, begged Lady Catherine to have something to eat or drink, but this was decidedly, and not very politely, refused. Then, rising, Lady Catherine said to Elizabeth: 'Miss Bennet, I should be glad to take a walk in your garden, if you will give me your company.'

	Elizabeth obeyed. As they passed through the hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors of the other rooms, and announced that they were a reasonably good size.

	They walked in silence towards the little wood. Elizabeth was determined to make no effort at conversation with a woman who was now more than usually rude and disagreeable.

	As soon as they entered the wood, Lady Catherine began in the following manner:

	'You can have no difficulty, Miss Bennet, in understanding the reason of my visit. Your own heart, your own conscience must tell you why I have come.'

	Elizabeth looked at her in astonishment.

	'Miss Bennet,' she continued in an angry voice, 'you ought to know that I will not be treated without proper regard for my position. A report of a most upsetting nature reached me two days ago. I was told that you, Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would in all probability be soon united to my nephew, my own nephew. Though I know that it must be a shameful lie, I immediately decided to come here so that I could make my feelings known to you.'

	'If you believed it impossible,' said Elizabeth, her face turning red with astonishment and scorn, 'I am surprised that you took the trouble of coming so far.'

	'This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I will be satisfied. Has he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?'

	'You have said that it is impossible.'

	'Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? Let me be rightly understood. Mr Darcy is engaged to my daughter. Now, what have you to say?'

	'Only this - that if it is so, you can have no reason to suppose that he will make an offer to me.'

	Lady Catherine paused for a moment, and then replied:

	'The arrangement between them is of a special kind. From their childhood they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of his mother, as well as of myself. Have you no respect for the wishes of his relations?'

	'But what is that to me? If Mr Darcy wishes, may he not make another choice? And if I am that choice, why may I not accept him?'

	'I will not be interrupted! Hear me in silence. I see there is a seat over there. Let us sit down. My daughter and my nephew are made for each other. Their birth and their fortunes are noble. And what will divide them? The plans of a young woman without rank or money?'

	'Your nephew is a gentleman, and I am a gentleman's daughter.'

	'But what is your mother? Who are your uncles and aunts? Do you imagine that I am without knowledge of their condition?'

	'If your nephew does not object to them,' replied Elizabeth, 'it can be nothing to you.'

	'Tell me, are you engaged to him?'

	Elizabeth could only say: 'I am not.' Lady Catherine seemed pleased.

	'And will you promise never to become engaged to my nephew?'

	'I will make no promise of any kind.'

	'Miss Bennet, I am shocked. The facts concerning your youngest sister are fully known to me. Is such a girl to be my nephew's sister? Is her husband, the son of his father's servant, to be his brother?'

	'You can now have nothing further to say to me,' Elizabeth answered with bitterness. 'You have insulted me in every possible way. I must beg to return to the house.'

	She rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine also rose, highly angered. She talked on, making many threats, until they were at the door of her carriage, when, suddenly turning round, she added:

	'I leave you without a goodbye, Miss Bennet. I send no greetings to your mother. You do not deserve such attention. I am most seriously displeased.'

	Elizabeth made no answer, but walked quietly into the house. Her mother met her impatiently. 'Had she anything special to say, Lizzy?'

	Elizabeth was forced to tell a small lie here, for to admit the truth about their conversation was impossible.

	***

	This astonishing visit upset Elizabeth for some time. She could not imagine what could be the origin of the report that she was engaged, unless talk had followed the news about Jane and Bingley. She could not help feeling some discomfort about the result of Lady Catherine's words, because she did not know the degree of her influence over her nephew. If he had been holding back before, his aunt's arguments might settle every doubt.

	'If, therefore, an excuse for not returning should come to his friend within a few days,' she thought, 'I shall lose all hope in the strength of his love.'

	The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by her father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.

	'Lizzy,' he said, 'I was going to look for you. Come into my room.'

	She followed him in, and they both sat down. He then said:

	'I have received a letter this morning concerning yourself that astonishes me. I did not know that I had two daughters about to be married. Let me congratulate you.'

	She now reddened in the immediate belief that it was a letter from the nephew instead of the aunt. He continued:

	'You look self-conscious, but I am sure that you cannot guess the name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr Collins.'

	'From Mr Collins! And what can he have to say?'

	'He begins with congratulations about Jane. He then goes on: "Your daughter Elizabeth, it is supposed, will also not long bear the name of Bennet, and her future partner has every kind of good fortune, in property, relations and influence. Yet in spite of all these, let me warn my cousin Elizabeth and yourself of the risks that she runs in accepting this gentleman's proposals." Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out. "His aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the relationship with a friendly eye." Mr Darcy, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think that I have surprised you! Could he have chosen a more unlikely man? Mr Darcy, who probably never looked at you in his life!'

	Elizabeth tried to join in her father's amusement, but could only force one unwilling smile. His joking had never been so little pleasing to her.

	'Are you not amused?'

	'Oh, yes! Please read on.'

	'He continues: "I thought it my duty to give information of this immediately to my cousin, so that she and her noble admirer may not act without careful thought." After that he adds, "I am truly happy that my cousin Lydia's sad business has been so well hidden. But I must not neglect the duties of my position, and must state my astonishment on hearing that you received the young pair into your house. You ought certainly to forgive them, but never to admit them to your sight or allow their names to be mentioned." That is his idea of forgiveness! But Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to pretend to be insulted, I hope, by stupid talk. For what do we live, if not to amuse our neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn?'

	'I am extremely amused!' said Elizabeth. 'But it is so strange!'

	'Yes, if they had fixed on any other man, it would have been nothing. But his complete lack of interest in you, and your sharp dislike of him, make it so particularly entertaining! And Lizzy, what did Lady Catherine say about this report? Did she call to refuse her agreement?'

	To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh, and as it had been asked without the least suspicion, she was not put into an awkward position by his repeating it. Elizabeth had never found it more difficult to make her feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly wounded her by what he said of Mr Darcy's lack of interest, and she feared that perhaps instead of his noticing too little, she might have imagined too much.



	CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN

	Elizabeth and Mr Darcy

	Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as Elizabeth half expected Mr Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy with him to Longbourn before many days had passed. The gentlemen arrived early, and Bingley suggested that they all go for a walk. Mrs Bennet was not in the habit of walking, and Mary could never give up the time, but the remaining five set out together. Bingley and Jane, though, soon allowed the others to get ahead of them, and Elizabeth, Kitty and Darcy were left to entertain each other.

	Kitty wanted to call on the Lucases, and when she left the other two, Elizabeth went on bravely with Darcy alone. She had secretly been making a difficult decision, and perhaps he had been doing the same. Now was the moment to put hers into action, so she said:

	'Mr Darcy, I am a very selfish creature, and, in order to give relief to my own feelings, do not care how much I may be wounding yours. I can no longer help thanking you for your deep kindness to my poor sister.'

	'I am sorry,' replied Darcy, in a voice full of surprise and feeling, 'that you have ever been informed of what may, by mistake, have given you discomfort of mind.'

	'Do not blame my aunt. Lydia's thoughtlessness first caused the truth to be known, and I could not rest until I knew the details. Let me thank you again, in the name of all my family.'

	'If you will thank me,' he replied, 'let it be for yourself alone. Your family owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe that I thought only of you.'

	Elizabeth was too confused to say a word. After a short pause, her companion added: 'You are too generous to keep me in uncertainty. If your feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. My love and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence me on this subject forever.'

	Elizabeth now forced herself to speak, and made him understand that her feelings had changed so completely since that period that she was grateful and pleased to hear his present words. The happiness that this reply produced was greater than he had probably ever experienced before, and he expressed himself on the occasion as warmly as a man who is violently in love can be expected to do.

	They walked on without knowing in what direction. There was too much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to anything else. She soon learnt that they owed their present good understanding to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him to describe her conversation with Elizabeth, but with the opposite effect to that which she intended.

	'It taught me to hope,' he said, 'as I had hardly allowed myself to hope before. I knew enough of your character to be certain that if you had been completely decided against me, you would have admitted it to Lady Catherine openly.'

	Elizabeth laughed as she replied, 'Yes, you knew enough of my readiness to speak plainly to believe that I was able to do that. After criticizing you so shamefully to your face, I could have no fear of criticizing you to your relations.'

	'What did you say of me that I did not deserve? For though your charges were mistaken, my behaviour to you then was unpardonable. I have been selfish all my life. Unfortunately, I was spoiled by my parents, who, though good themselves, encouraged me to be proud and to think with scorn of the rest of the world. That is how I was, and how I might still be if I had not met you, dearest Elizabeth! You taught me a lesson, a hard one, but most advantageous. You showed me how small were all my claims to please a woman who deserved to be pleased.'

	'I am almost afraid to ask what you thought of me when we met at Pemberley. Did you blame me for coming?'

	'No, no, I felt nothing but surprise.'

	'I admit that I did not expect to be so well received.'

	'My aim then,' replied Darcy, 'was to show you, by every attention, that I had no bad feelings for you, and I hoped to obtain your forgiveness, and lessen your bad opinion of me, by letting you see that I was trying to cure my faults.'

	After walking several miles in an unhurried manner, they examined their watches and found that it was time to be at home.

	Wherever were Mr Bingley and Jane! This thought introduced a discussion of their affairs. Darcy was very happy that they had become engaged.

	'I must ask you whether you were surprised,' said Elizabeth.

	'Not at all. When I went away, I felt it would happen.'

	'That is to say, you had given your permission.' And though he refused to say so, she found that it was very much the case.

	'I told him, before I left, that I thought that I had given him mistaken advice, and that I had been at fault in supposing your sister did not care for him.'

	'Did you speak from what you had seen yourself, or only from my information last spring?'

	'From the former. I watched your sister closely during the two visits which I recently made here, and I felt sure of her love for Bingley.'

	Elizabeth would have liked to remark that Mr Bingley was a most satisfactory friend, so easily guided, but she controlled herself. She remembered that Darcy still had to learn to be laughed at, and it was rather early to begin.

	They continued in conversation until they reached the house, and parted in the hall.

	***

	'My dear Lizzy, where have you been walking to?' was the question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered the room, and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to say that they had wandered about until they had lost their way. Her face turned slightly red as she spoke, but nobody suspected the truth.

	The evening passed quietly. It was not in Darcy's nature to express happiness through high spirits, and Elizabeth was thinking of what her family would feel when everything was known.

	At night, she opened her heart to Jane.

	'You are joking, Lizzy. Engaged to Mr Darcy! No, no, you shall not deceive me. I know that it is impossible.'

	'But, it's true, I am serious. I speak nothing but the truth.'

	'Oh, Lizzy, I know how much you dislike him.'

	'That is all forgotten. Perhaps I did not always love him as well as I do now.'

	'But are you certain - forgive the question - are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?'

	'There can be no doubt of that. But are you pleased, Jane?'

	'Very, very much. Nothing could give Bingley or myself greater pleasure. Oh, Lizzy, are you sure that you feel what you ought to feel?'

	'I am only afraid you will think that I feel more than I ought, when I tell you all.'

	'What do you mean?'

	'Well, I must admit that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am afraid that you will be angry.'

	'My dearest sister, be serious. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?'

	'I believe that I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at Pemberley.'

	Another request that she should be serious produced the desired effect, and she soon made Jane believe in her sincerity. Elizabeth told the reasons for her former secrecy: her unsettled feelings, and her unwillingness to mention Bingley, which she could hardly have avoided doing if she had spoken of the meeting in Derbyshire. Half the night was spent in conversation.

	'Oh, heavens!' cried Mrs Bennet, as she stood at the window the next morning. 'That disagreeable Mr Darcy is coming here again with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so annoying? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, so that he will not be in Bingley's way.'

	Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal, but she was really annoyed that her mother should be speaking of him in such a manner.

	As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth, that she was in no doubt of his knowledge, and he soon afterwards said, 'Mrs Bennet, have you no more country roads round about here, in which Lizzy may lose her way again today?'

	'I advise Mr Darcy and Lizzy and Kitty,' said Mrs Bennet, 'to walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr Darcy has never seen the view.'

	'I am sure that it would be too much for Kitty,' said Bingley.

	Kitty admitted that she would rather stay at home. As Elizabeth went upstairs, her mother followed her, saying:

	'I am sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself, but it is all for Jane, you know. There is no need to talk to him, except just now and then, so do not put yourself to inconvenience.'

	During the walk, it was decided that Mr Bennet's agreement to the marriage should be asked during the evening. Elizabeth kept for herself the duty of asking her mother's.

	In the evening, soon after Mr Bennet had gone to his library, Mr Darcy followed him. Elizabeth's anxiety was extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition, but that she should be making him unhappy by her choice was a troubling thought. She was a little relieved by Darcy's smile on his return, when he whispered to her, 'Go to your father.' She went directly.

	Her father was walking about the room, looking serious. 'Lizzy,' he said, 'what are you doing? Are you out of your mind, to be accepting this man? Have you not always hated him?'

	How deeply she then wished that her former opinions had been more reasonable, and her expression of them less extreme! It would have saved her explanations that it was very awkward to give. She told him, in some confusion, of the strength of her feelings for Mr Darcy.

	'That is to say, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy? We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant man.'

	'I do, I do like him,' she replied, with tears in her eyes. 'And what you say of him is untrue. You do not know what he really is.'

	'Lizzy,' said her father, 'I have agreed. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your nature, Lizzy. I know that you could not be happy unless you truly respected your husband. My child, do not let me have the unhappiness of seeing you unable to think well of your partner in life.'

	At last, by repeating that Mr Darcy was really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change in her feelings, and her proof of the unchanging nature of his, and describing with energy all his good qualities, she did persuade her father to believe her, and make him satisfied with her choice. To complete his favourable opinion, she then told him what Mr Darcy had done for Lydia.

	'Well, my dear,' he said, when she had finished speaking, 'if this is the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my Lizzy, to anyone who did not.'

	He then reminded her of her confusion a few days before when he was reading Mr Collins's letter and, after laughing at her, allowed her to go, saying as she left the room, 'If any young men come for Mary or Kitty, send them in. I am not busy.'

	Elizabeth's mind was now relieved of a very heavy weight, and after half an hour's quiet thought in her own room, she was able to join the others in fairly settled spirits.

	When her mother went up to her dressing room at night, she followed her and made the important announcement. Its effect was most astonishing. When she heard it, Mrs Bennet sat quite still, unable to say a word. Only after many, many minutes could she understand what she had heard. She began at last to recover, to move about in her chair, get up, sit down again, and every now and then let out a small laugh.

	'Oh, heavens! Lord save me! Only think! Mr Darcy! Who would have thought it! Oh, my sweetest Lizzy, how rich and great you will be! What jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane's is nothing to it - nothing at all. Such a pleasant man! So good-looking! So tall! Oh, my dear Lizzy! Do apologize for my having disliked him so much before. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, heavens! What will happen to me? I shall go out of my mind.'

	This was an unpleasing example of what her mother's behaviour might be like in the presence of Mr Darcy, but the next day passed off better than Elizabeth expected. Luckily Mrs Bennet was so filled with respect for her intended son-in-law that she did not dare to speak to him, except to offer him some mark of attention.

	Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father making every effort to know him better, and Mr Bennet soon informed her that Mr Darcy was rising in his opinion every hour.



	CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT

	The End

	It was a happy day for all her feelings as a mother, when Mrs Bennet saw her two most deserving daughters married. It may be guessed that she afterwards visited Mrs Bingley, and talked of Mrs Darcy, with excited pride. I wish I could say that the satisfaction of her dreams for them made her a sensible woman for the rest of her life, though perhaps it was lucky for her husband's amusement that she still often had an attack of nerves, and was never anything but silly.

	Mr Bennet missed his second daughter very much. His love for her caused him to travel from home more often than anything else could do. He enjoyed going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.

	Mr Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield for only a year. The nearness of her mother was not desirable even to his kindly nature or her loving heart. He then bought a property in Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other happiness, lived within 30 miles of each other.

	Kitty, to her very great advantage, spent most of her time with her two older sisters. In society that was so much better than what she had generally known, her improvement was great. She was not of so uncontrollable a nature as Lydia, and when she was removed from the influence of her example became less complaining and less silly. Although Lydia frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with promises of dances and young men, her father would never allow her to go.

	Mary was the only daughter who remained at home, and she was necessarily interrupted in her studies and her efforts at making music by the fact that Mrs Bennet was quite unable to sit alone. Mary was forced to mix more with the world, and as her more beautiful sisters were no longer there to be compared with her, she was not unwilling to do so.

	As for Lydia and Wickham, their characters remained unchanged. He bore with calmness the knowledge that Elizabeth must now have learnt every detail about his past, and both he and Lydia were not without hope that Darcy could still be persuaded to make his fortune. Elizabeth did frequently send some relief from her own private money, and because of his love for Elizabeth, Darcy helped Wickham to get a better position in the army. Although her husband could never be received at Pemberley, Lydia was sometimes a visitor there, and they both of them frequently stayed so long with the Bingleys that even Bingley's good temper failed him.

	Miss Bingley was much annoyed by Darcy's marriage, but as she wanted to continue to visit Pemberley, she was forced to be polite to Elizabeth.

	Pemberley was now Georgiana's home, and the sisterly love that grew between her and Elizabeth was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth, though at first she often listened with astonishment to her lively, joking way of talking to the brother for whom she, as a much younger sister, felt so much respect.

	Lady Catherine was extremely angry at the marriage of her nephew, and expressed her feelings in a letter so insulting to Elizabeth that for a time all friendly connections were ended. The Collinses removed to Lucas Lodge until the storm had blown over, which it did at last, when Elizabeth persuaded her husband to offer to end the quarrel.

	With the Gardiners they had always the warmest relationship. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them, and they both felt most grateful towards the persons who, by bringing her to Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	Chapter one

	Meet Maxim de Winter

	What would I be today if I had not gone to Monte Carlo with Mrs Van Hopper? I would have lived another life. I would have become a different person.

	Mrs Van Hopper was not a pleasant woman. She loved to meet people who were rich and famous. Every summer, Mrs Van Hopper stayed at the Hotel Cote d'Azur, the biggest and most expensive hotel in Monte Carlo. Here, Mrs Van Hopper found out which well-known people were staying in the town. She always found an excuse to speak to them. Then, pretending to know them well, she asked her victims rude questions in her loud American voice.

	I was young and shy. I hated my life with Mrs Van Hopper, but she paid me a little money to be her companion. I was not exactly a servant and certainly not a friend.

	We must have looked a strange pair as we walked into the hotel restaurant that day. Mrs Van Hopper walked in front of me on her high-heeled shoes. Her fat, heavy body swayed above her short fat legs. I followed slowly, my eyes looking down at the floor. With my straight hair and badly-fitting clothes I looked like an awkward schoolgirl.

	Mrs Van Hopper sat down at her usual table and stared at everyone in the restaurant.

	'There isn't one well-known person here,' she said in her loud voice. 'There's no one I want to talk to.'

	Mrs Van Hopper was very greedy. She ordered a large lunch for herself. Soon she was eating a large plateful of spaghetti. We ate in silence. The rich sauce ran down Mrs Van Hopper's chin. I looked away. Then I saw that a new guest was sitting down at the next table. Mrs Van Hopper saw him too. She put down her fork and stared at him hard. How an excited look come into her small eyes.

	'It's Max de Winter,' she said to me. 'The man who owns Manderley. You must have heard of it - a beautiful old house in the west of England. He looks ill, doesn't he? His wife died suddenly last year. They say he's broken hearted.'

	I felt sorry for de Winter already. He was Mrs Van Hopper's next victim. She finished her meal as quickly as possible. I knew what she was going to do.

	There was a long seat in the hotel lounge, with a low table in front of it. The seat was between the restaurant and the main door of the hotel. Everyone who left the restaurant had to walk past this seat.

	'I'll take my coffee in the lounge,' Mrs Van Hopper told the waiter, 'straight away.'

	She turned to me, her eyes shining: 'Go upstairs and find that letter from my nephew, Billy. Bring it to me in the lounge and the photographs too. Billy met Max de Winter in London. Be quick.'

	I went up to Mrs Van Hopper's rooms as slowly as I could. I hoped that de Winter would get away before I returned.

	When I came back with the letter, Mrs Van Hopper was already on the seat in the lounge. De Winter was sitting next to her. He was a dark-haired, handsome man. His face was pale and his dark eyes had a sad, lost look. De Winter stood up politely as I gave Mrs Van Hopper her letter.

	'Mr de Winter is having coffee with us. Go and ask the waiter for another cup,' Mrs Van Hopper told me.

	'No, you are my guests,' said de Winter. He called the waiter.

	In a moment, de Winter was sitting on a small chair and I was next to Mrs Van Hopper on the long seat.

	'I recognized you at once,' Mrs Van Hopper said. 'I met you at my nephew's party, in London. But I don't suppose you remember an old woman like me?' And Mrs Van Hopper gave de Winter one of her biggest smiles.

	'You are wrong, I could never forget you,' said de Winter in a cold, hard voice.

	'Billy's on holiday now,' Mrs Van Hopper went on. 'He loves travelling. But if he had a home like Manderley, he would never leave it. People say that Manderley's one of the most beautiful houses in England. I wonder what you are doing here in Monte Carlo?'

	For a few moments there was silence. Then de Winter spoke. 'Manderley was looking very lovely when I came away.' There was another silence. De Winter had not answered Mrs Van Hopper's question. She was not silent for long, of course. She started to tell de Winter all the unpleasant gossip of Monte Carlo.

	After his moment of rudeness, de Winter listened to her politely. I looked down at the floor and tried not to hear Mrs Van Hopper's loud voice. At last she had to stop. A waiter came up to her with a message. Mrs Van Hopper's dressmaker was waiting for her upstairs.

	De Winter stood up at once. 'You mustn't keep your dressmaker waiting,' he said.

	Mrs Van Hopper smiled. 'You must have a drink with me,' she said. 'Why not tomorrow evening? I'm having a few friends...'

	'I'm sorry,' de Winter said quickly. 'I shall be away all day tomorrow. If you will excuse me...' He turned and walked out of the lounge.

	'What a strange man Max de Winter is,' said Mrs Van Hopper when we were standing in the lift. 'He left so suddenly. But he is certainly an attractive man. By the way, dear, you were rather rude to him. You must look at people when they are speaking. You are not a child, you know.'

	Mrs Van Hopper was soon busy with her dressmaker. I sat on a window seat, looking at the bright day outside. I could not go out. Some of Mrs Van Hopper's friends were coming to tea. They were fat, rude women like herself. My job was to talk to them, light their cigarettes and tidy the room after they had gone.

	There was a knock on the door. A waiter came in with a note in his hand. 'Madame is in the bedroom,' I told him. But the note was for me. There were a few words in an unknown handwriting.

	'Forgive me. I was very rude after lunch.' The note was not signed, but I knew it was from de Winter.

	'Is there an answer?' the waiter asked me. I looked up. 'No. No answer,' I said.

	After the waiter had gone, I put the note in my pocket. Mrs Van Hopper called me from her bedroom. I got up slowly, thinking about de Winter and about Manderley.



	Chapter two

	A Day Out Together

	The following day, Mrs Van Hopper woke up with a sore throat and a high temperature. I rang up her doctor and he came round at once.

	'You have flu, Madame,' the doctor told her. 'You won't get better unless you stay quietly in bed. Your heart isn't strong. You'll need a nurse to look after you. You must stay in bed for a week or two.'

	'I'm sure I could look after Mrs Van Hopper,' I said. But the doctor said no. To my surprise, Mrs Van Hopper agreed with him. Monte Carlo had begun to bore her. She would enjoy staying in bed. She would enjoy giving orders to the nurse as well as to me.

	The nurse soon arrived and I was no longer wanted. I went down to the restaurant by myself. I was glad to be alone. It was half an hour before our usual lunch-time. The restaurant was almost empty. I went to our usual table. Then I saw that de Winter was already at his table. It was too late for me to go back. I sat down awkwardly trying not to look at him. As I picked up the menu, I knocked over the flowers on the table. The water went all over the cloth and ran down on to my skirt. The waiter was at the other end of the restaurant and saw nothing. In a moment, de Winter was standing by my chair.

	'You can't sit here now,' he said. He called to the waiter who came up at once. 'Lay another place at my table,' de Winter said. 'This lady is lunching with me.'

	'Oh no,' I said. 'I couldn't...'

	'Why not?' he said. 'I want you to have lunch with me. I was going to ask you anyway. Come and sit down. You needn't talk if you don't want to.'

	We ordered our food and sat for a time in a pleasant, easy silence.

	'What's happened to your friend?' de Winter asked me. I told him about Mrs Van Hopper's illness.

	'I'm sorry,' he said politely. 'You got my note, I suppose. It's very kind of you to lunch with me after my rudeness.'

	'You were not rude,' I said. 'At least, she did not think you were. She is always so curious about anyone important.'

	'Important? Why does she think that I'm important?' de Winter asked.

	'I think it's because of Manderley,' I said. He did not answer. I felt that he did not want to talk about his home.

	'Your friend is very different from you,' he said at last. 'And she's much older than you too. Is she a relation?'

	'Mrs Van Hopper is not my friend,' I said. 'I work for her. I have to, I need the money. I have no family and there is nothing else I can do.'

	De Winter asked me more questions about myself. I forgot my shyness. I told him about my father, who had been a painter. I talked about my mother and her great love for my father. When my father had died very suddenly, my mother had lived only a few weeks after him.

	I suddenly realized that we had been sitting at the table for more than an hour. I began to apologize.

	'But I've enjoyed this hour so much,' de Winter said. 'We are alike in some ways. We are both alone in the world. I have a sister, but that's all.'

	'You forget,' I told him, 'that you have a home and I have none.'

	'An empty house, even a very beautiful one, can be lonely,' de Winter said.

	I thought for a moment that he was going to tell me about Manderley. But instead he said, 'Well, I suppose you have a holiday this afternoon. What are you going to do?'

	I told him that I was going to do some sketching. I wanted to draw some of the old houses in a nearby town. The bus left at half past two.

	'I'll drive you there in my car,' de Winter said. 'Go upstairs and get your coat.'

	I got my things very quietly. I did not want Mrs Van Hopper to hear me. I ran down the stairs, holding my gloves in one hand. I felt excited and grown-up. I did not feel shy with de Winter. He enjoyed my company. He had asked me to go out with him in his car.

	We soon reached the place where I wanted to sketch. But the wind was too strong - it blew the paper away. We got into the car again and drove on, up the steep mountain road. Then suddenly the road came to an end. De Winter stopped the car at the very edge. Far below us lay the sea. I felt cold and a little afraid.

	'Do you know this place?' I said. 'Have you been here before?'

	De Winter looked at me as though I were a stranger. He was lost in the past. There was a strange, faraway look on his face. He looked like a man walking in his sleep.

	'It's getting late, shall we go home?' I said. Then he looked at me and smiled.

	'I'm sorry,' he said. 'I should not have brought you up here. Yes, I have been here before, many years ago.'

	Those years seemed to stretch between us. For the first time, I wished that I had not come.

	De Winter turned the car carefully, and we drove down the twisting road again. The sun was setting now and the air was cold and clear.

	Then, at last, he began to talk about Manderley. He did not talk about his life there, but about the house itself. He told me about the gardens and the flowers in the woods. He told me about the sea. It was so near that the sound of its waters could always be heard from the house. He told me about a little, secret valley close to the sea. This little valley, hidden away from the world, was full of the scent of flowers.

	Then we were back in Monte Carlo. We drove slowly through the brightly lit streets towards the hotel. I took my gloves from the shelf of the car. There was a book there. I looked at it, trying to read the title.

	'You can take the book and look at it, if you like,' de Winter said. I was glad and I held the book tightly in my hand. I wanted to have something of his now that our day was over.

	'Out you get,' he said, 'I must put the car away. I won't see you tonight. I shall be out. But thank you for today.'

	I walked slowly up the hotel steps. I felt like a child going home after a party. I thought of the long hours to bedtime. I could not meet Mrs Van Hopper and answer the endless questions. I went into the lounge and ordered tea.

	The waiter brought me tea that was nearly cold. The sandwiches were dry, but I ate them without thinking. In my mind I was with Max de Winter at Manderley. If he loved his home so much, why had he left it?

	I picked up the book he had given me. It was a book of poems. On the front page there was some writing - hard, clear writing in black ink:

	"Max - from Rebecca, 17th May."

	The name Rebecca stood out black and strong. The "R" was tall, much bigger than the other letters. I shut the book quickly. I remembered what Mrs Van Hopper had told me about de Winter's wife.

	'It was dreadful,' she had said. 'Her death was in all the newspapers. They say he never talks about it, never says her name. Rebecca was drowned, you know, in the sea near Manderley.'

	I stood up slowly, the book in my hand. I walked unhappily to the lift and back to Mrs Van Hopper.



	Chapter three

	In Love

	 I was twenty-one and de Winter was the first man I had ever loved. First love is not always happy. It can sometimes be like a terrible illness.

	Mrs Van Hopper had been in bed for about ten days. She was bored now, and more bad tempered than usual. She asked me what I had been doing.

	'You haven't got enough to do and so you are doing nothing,' she said unpleasantly. 'You never have any drawings to show me. When I ask you to do some shopping, you always forget something. You are getting lazy without me to watch you.'

	I did not reply. I could not tell Mrs Van Hopper that every morning I drove with de Winter in his car. Every day I had lunch with him at his table.

	I have forgotten the places we went to, but I have not forgotten the excitement of those mornings. I remember how I ran down the stairs because the lift was too slow. He was always waiting in his car, reading the paper. When he saw me, he would smile and say, 'Well, how is the companion this morning? Where would you like to go?'

	If we had driven round-in circles, I would not have cared. I was happy to sit next to him, to be alone with him. But the time always went too quickly. There was a clock in the car. I could not help looking at it as we drove along.

	'If only we could keep our memories like scent in a bottle,' I said one day. 'And then we could open the bottle when we wanted to remember the moment again.'

	'And what moment would you like to keep?' de Winter said with a smile.

	'I'm not sure,' I began. Then I said quickly, 'I'd like to keep this moment and never forget it.'

	De Winter laughed. I suddenly felt very young and very silly.

	'I wish,' I said angrily, '... I wish I was a woman of about thirty-six. I wish I was wearing a lot of make-up and had expensive clothes.'

	'You would not be in this car now if you were like that,' he said.

	'Why do you ask me to come out in your car, day after day?' I said. 'I'm young, I know nothing. I am not an interesting person at all. You know all about me now. I have told you everything. But I know nothing about you, nothing - except that you live at Manderley and... and that your wife is dead.'

	I had said the words, at last. Your wife. Your wife. He would never forgive me. I shall never drive with him again, I thought. He slowed down the car and we stopped by the side of the road. Then he turned to me and spoke.

	'A little while ago, you said you wanted to keep your memories. For me, it is different. All my memories are unhappy. I want to forget them. Something happened a year ago that changed my whole life. I want to forget everything that happened to me before that time. That's why I came to Monte Carlo. If you had not been here, I would have left long ago. I ask you to drive with me because I like you. I enjoy your company. If you don't believe me, you can get out of the car now.'

	I sat very still. I could not speak. I could feel the tears coming into my eyes. 'I want to go home now,' I said.

	Without a word, he started the car and we drove on. The tears began to run down my cheeks. Suddenly de Winter took my hand and kissed it. Then he gave me his handkerchief. I wiped my red eyes. I had never felt more alone.

	'To hell with this,' he said and put his arm round my shoulders. 'You are so young, I don't know how to speak to you. Forget everything I told you. Let's start again. My family always call me Maxim. I'd like you to call me that too.'

	I smiled then, and he laughed back at me. The morning was happy again. The afternoon with Mrs Van Hopper did not matter. I could look forward to tomorrow morning and the morning after. I could call him Maxim. He had kissed me.

	I had to play cards with Mrs Van Hopper that afternoon, but I was still happy. When we had finished our game, Mrs Van Hopper said, 'Tell me, is Max de Winter still in the hotel?'

	'Yes. Yes, I think so. He comes into the restaurant sometimes,' I said.

	Someone has told her, I thought. Someone has seen us together. I waited for her to ask more questions. But she did not.

	'He's an attractive man,' she said, 'but not easy to know. I never saw his wife. People say she was very lovely. She was clever too, and always beautifully dressed, of course. Her death was very sudden. Everyone says he adored her.'

	I did not answer. I was thinking about Rebecca - beautiful and clever. People could not forget her. Somehow, she and her beauty had not died.

	In my bedroom was a book that Rebecca had held in her hands. His family called him Maxim. Rebecca had called him Max. I thought of the writing on that page. It was bold and full of life. Rebecca was all the things that I would never be. I thought of all the letters Rebecca had written to her husband. They must have been full of the life they had shared.

	I thought I could hear her voice calling him. She called him Max. It was her special name for him. And I had to call him Maxim.



	Chapter four

	I Leave Monte Carlo

	Two days later, everything had changed. Mrs Van Hopper and I were ready to leave Monte Carlo. All the trunks and bags were packed. All the drawers and cupboards were empty.

	Mrs Van Hopper had read a letter from her daughter at breakfast. 'Helen is sailing for New York on Saturday. Her child's ill. We are going too. I'm tired of living here. How would you like to see New York?'

	The thought of leaving Monte Carlo and Maxim de Winter was a terrible one. My unhappiness must have shown on my face.

	'What a strange child you are,' Mrs Van Hopper said. 'I can't understand you. I thought you didn't like Monte Carlo.'

	'I've got used to it,' I said.

	'Well, you'll have to get used to New York, that's all. We're going on the same boat as Helen. You'll have to arrange everything at once. Go down to the hotel office now. You will be too busy to feel unhappy.'

	She laughed unpleasantly at my sad face. She walked over to the telephone. She wanted to tell everyone that she was leaving.

	I went into the bathroom and locked the door. I wanted to be alone for a few minutes. My happiness was at an end. By tomorrow evening, I should be on the train. The train would carry me away from Maxim, mile by mile. He would be sitting in the restaurant, reading perhaps and not thinking of me. Where would I say goodbye to him? In the lounge, with Mrs Van Hopper standing near? I was going and everything was over. We would say goodbye like two strangers.

	Mrs Van Hopper knocked on the bathroom door.

	'What are you doing in there?' she said. 'There's no time to dream this morning. There's too much to be done.'

	I washed my face with cold water and came out of the bathroom at once. I spent the rest of the day packing and arranging the journey. In the evening, Mrs Van Hopper's friends came to say goodbye. We had dinner upstairs and Mrs Van Hopper went to bed early. I had not seen Maxim all day. I went down to the lounge at half past nine. A waiter saw me. He knew who I was looking for, of course.

	'Mr de Winter is out this evening,' he told me. 'He will not be back before midnight.'

	I walked slowly back up the stairs. Tomorrow would be too late. I should not be able to speak to him at all. That night I cried. My pillow was wet with tears. In the morning, my eyes were red and swollen.

	'You haven't got a cold, have you?' said Mrs Van Hopper when she saw my face.

	'No,' I said, 'I don't think so.' I tried not to look at her.

	'I hate waiting around when everything is packed,' Mrs Van Hopper said bad temperedly. 'We ought to have gone on the earlier train.' She looked at her watch. 'I think we could still catch it. Go down to the reception desk and ask. Hurry up.'

	So my last morning was to be taken away from me. I would not see Maxim. Suddenly, I made up my mind. Instead of going down to the reception desk, I ran up the stairs. I knew the number of his room. I knocked on the door.

	'Come in,' Maxim shouted. I opened the door. He was having breakfast at a small table in his sitting-room. I stood by the door, feeling silly and awkward.

	'What do you want?' he said. 'Is something wrong?'

	'I've come to say goodbye,' I said. 'We're going this morning. In about an hour. I thought I would not see you again.'

	Maxim stared at me. 'Why didn't you tell me about this before?' he said.

	'Mrs Van Hopper only decided to leave yesterday. Her daughter sails for New York on Saturday and we're going with her. I don't want to go. I'll hate New York.'

	'Why go there, then?'

	'I have to. I work for her, you know that. I can't afford to leave her.'

	'Sit down,' he said. 'Have some coffee.'

	'I haven't time,' I told him. 'I should be downstairs now.'

	'Never mind about that, I've got to talk to you.'

	I sat down at the table.

	'So Mrs Van Hopper wants to go home,' said Maxim. 'So do I. She goes to New York and I go to Manderley. Which do you prefer? You can take your choice.'

	'Please don't joke about it,' I said. 'I must say goodbye now.'

	'I'm not joking,' said Maxim. 'Either you go to America with Mrs Van Hopper or you come home to Manderley with me.'

	'Do you want a secretary?' I asked, not understanding him.

	'No, I'm asking you to marry me, you little fool.'

	I sat with my hands in my lap, watching him drink his coffee.

	'You can't marry me,' I said at last. 'I'm different from you. I don't belong to your kind of world. I don't belong to a place like Manderley.'

	'What do you know about Manderley?' Maxim said. 'I want you to marry me. Are you going to?'

	I sat there, staring at him. I could not think clearly.

	'The idea doesn't seem to please you,' Maxim said. 'I'm sorry, I thought you loved me.'

	'I do love you,' I said, 'I do. I've been crying all night. I thought I would never see you again.'

	When I said this, Maxim laughed and put his hand over mine.

	'One day I'll remind you of those words. It's a pity you have to grow up,' he said.

	Was Maxim laughing at me? Was it all a joke?

	He saw the look on my face. 'I haven't done this very well, have I?' Maxim said. 'Men don't usually propose at breakfast. But I'll take you to Venice for our honeymoon. We'll travel round Italy for a time. Then, in the spring, we'll go back to Manderley. I want to show you Manderley so much.'

	Maxim wanted to show me Manderley. Suddenly I believed everything. I would be Maxim's wife. We would walk in the gardens of Manderley together. We would walk through that hidden valley to the sea. Mrs de Winter - I would be Mrs de Winter.

	'Am I going to tell Mrs Van Hopper or are you?' said Maxim with a smile.

	I had forgotten all about Mrs Van Hopper. 'You tell her,' I said. 'She'll be so angry.'

	We got up from the table and walked out of the room together. Maxim took my hand. 'I'm forty-two,' he said. 'That must seem very old to you.'

	'Oh, no,' I said. 'I don't like young men.' I was still afraid that Maxim would change his mind.

	We came to the door of Mrs Van Hopper's rooms.

	'I think I'll talk to her alone,' Maxim said. 'I'll tell her we are getting married very soon. We'll have a quiet wedding. Everything can be arranged in a few days.'

	'Of course,' I said. 'I don't want a lot of fuss.'

	I opened the door.

	'Is that you?' called Mrs Van Hopper. 'Where have you been? What have you been doing all this time?'

	I did not know whether to laugh or cry. Maxim walked towards the sitting-room.

	'I'm afraid it's all my fault,' he said and then he shut the door. I went into my bedroom and waited.

	I wondered what Maxim was saying to Mrs Van Hopper. Was he saying, 'I love her. I want to marry her at once.'?

	Love. Maxim had not said anything to me about love. He had said we would get married. But he had not said that he loved me. He had loved Rebecca, of course. How could he love me, after her? I would be a companion for him. Someone to make him laugh perhaps.

	The book of poems was beside me, on the bed. I opened it. I read again, 'Max, from Rebecca.' She was dead. But the writing still looked fresh and alive.

	I took some scissors and cut the page out of the book. I tore up the page. I lit a match and set fire to the pieces. The paper twisted, blackened and turned to ashes. The letter "R" was the last to be burnt. Then the flame destroyed it. I washed my hands. I felt better, much better now.

	As I stood there, the door opened and Maxim came in.

	'Everything is all right,' he said. 'She could not speak at first. She was too surprised. Go in and talk to her. I'm going downstairs to arrange about her train. I don't want her to come to the wedding.'

	Maxim was smiling, but he said nothing about being happy. He said nothing about love. I walked slowly into Mrs Van Hopper's bedroom. She was standing by the window, smoking a cigarette. She turned round and looked at me carefully.

	'Well,' she said, 'you are more clever than I thought. How did you do it?'

	I did not know what to say. Mrs Van Hopper was smiling, but there was no kindness in her smile. 'It was lucky for you that I was ill,' she said. 'You certainly made the most of your time. He tells me that he wants to marry you in a few days. Well, I can't stop you. He's much older than you, you know.'

	'He's only forty-two,' I said. 'I know what I'm doing.' Mrs Van Hopper looked at me again with the same unpleasant smile.

	'I hope you do. You won't find it easy to look after Manderley. You haven't any experience and you're too shy. Max de Winter is very attractive, of course. But I think you're making a big mistake.'

	I did not say anything. I was young and shy, I knew that. But I was going to be Mrs de Winter. I was going to live at Manderley. And I was going to make Maxim happy.

	Mrs Van Hopper put out her cigarette. She walked slowly towards me.

	'Of course,' she said, 'you know why he is marrying you, don't you? He's not in love with you. The truth is he's lonely by himself at Manderley. He can't live in that empty house without Rebecca. He's marrying you because he can't go on living there alone.'



	Chapter five

	I Come to Manderley

	W m to Manderley early in May. It was the best time of year, before the heat of summer. When we left London, it was raining hard. I remember Maxim saying, 'This is London rain. The sun will be shining for you when we come to Manderley.'

	He was right. Long before we reached Manderley, there was blue sky over our heads. I was glad to see the sun. I welcomed it as a sign of happiness.

	'Feeling better?' said Maxim, looking at me. I smiled at him and took his hand. It was so easy for Maxim. He was going back to his own home. But for me, everything was new and strange. I was going to Manderley for the first time. And I was going there as the second wife of Maxim de Winter.

	'Only two more miles,' said Maxim at last. 'Can you see those trees on the hill in front of us? Manderley is in the valley beyond those trees.'

	I tried to smile but suddenly I felt lonely and afraid. I was like a child on her first day at school.

	Turning a corner, we came to a crossroads and the beginning of a high wall.

	'Here we are,' Maxim said. 'Manderley at last.' I could hear the excitement in his voice.

	The road turned again. On the left, were two high iron gates and beside them a small lodge. The gates were wide open for us. People were looking out of the windows of the lodge. They were looking at me. I sat back in my seat. I wanted to hide from their curious eyes.

	'You mustn't mind if people stare at you,' Maxim said. 'They are all very interested in you. Don't worry. Be yourself and everyone at Manderley will love you. Mrs Danvers looks after the house. She's been housekeeper here for years. Leave everything to her. She may be rather strange at first, but don't worry about that. She will soon get used to you.'

	We were going along the drive now that led up to the house. The drive turned and twisted like a snake. The tall trees met over our heads. Only a little sunlight came through their thick branches. Everything was very quiet. On and on we went. Then suddenly the trees came to an end. The sun shone again. Beautiful high bushes covered with bright red flowers stood on either side of us.

	We were not far from the house now. The drive widened. We turned the last corner and there was Manderley. The old house was perfect. It was built in a small hollow and its grey stones glowed in the sunlight. Smooth green lawns surrounded the house. Beyond the lawns were gardens and beyond the gardens, the sea.

	Maxim drove up to the wide stone steps and stopped the car in front of them. At the top of the steps, a big door stood wide open. I saw that the hall beyond was full of people. I could see their faces, all turned towards us. I was suddenly shy and afraid again. 'What's the matter?' I said. 'Who are all those people?'

	'I'm sorry,' Maxim said. 'This must be Mrs Danvers' idea. Everyone who works at Manderley is here. Don't look so frightened. You won't have to say anything. I'll do it all.'

	An old man with a kind face came down the steps.

	'Well, here we are, Frith,' said Maxim. 'Everyone well?'

	'Yes, thank you, sir,' said Frith. 'We are all very glad to see you at home again. We hope you are well. And Madam too, of course.'

	'Yes, we are both well, thank you, Frith. But we're tired from the drive and we want our tea. I didn't expect all these people.'

	'Mrs Danvers' orders, sir,' said Frith.

	'I thought so,' Maxim said. 'Come on,' he said to me. 'It won't take long and then you can have your tea in peace.'

	We went together up the wide stone steps. Inside the open door, the servants stood in two lines. A tall, thin woman dressed in black came towards us. Her pale, thin face was hard. There was no welcome in her dark eyes. The hand she placed in mine was cold and heavy, like something dead.

	'This is Mrs Danvers, our housekeeper,' said Maxim. The woman began to speak in a cold, lifeless voice. I remember nothing of what she said. I suppose she was welcoming me to Manderley. As I thanked her, Mrs Danvers looked at me with her hard, dark eyes. I dropped my gloves on the floor and Mrs Danvers picked them up with a twisted little smile on her lips. She could see that I was awkward and shy, and a little afraid of my new life at Manderley.

	Maxim noticed nothing. He thanked Mrs Danvers quickly and took me into the library for tea. We were alone at last.

	A dog ran up from the fireside to greet us. He went first to Maxim and then sat down beside me. I was glad of the dog's friendly welcome. The library was a large comfortable room. Its walls were covered with books from the floor to the ceiling. Comfortable chairs stood on either side of a great open fireplace. From its long windows I could see the lawns and beyond the lawns, the sea. There was a quiet peace in the room. It was a place for rest, for reading and for quiet thinking.

	Tea was brought to us by Frith and a younger servant. There was a special table and a snow-white cloth to cover it. The teapot and kettle were of silver and the china was very fine. There were sandwiches, bread and butter and several kinds of cake. There was far too much food for two people. But this was the tea served at Manderley every day.

	Maxim sat in a chair by the fire reading the letters that had been waiting for him. Now and again, he looked up at me and smiled. I leant back in my chair, drinking my tea and trying to feel at home. It was true. Manderley was my home now - my home and Maxim's. But somehow I still could not believe it.

	My thoughts were interrupted by the opening of the door. It was Frith.

	'Excuse me, Madam,' he said. 'Mrs Danvers asked if you would like to see your room.'

	Maxim looked up from his letters. 'What do the rooms in the east wing look like now?' he said.

	'Very nice indeed, sir,' Frith replied. 'I think you will be very comfortable there.'

	'Have you been making changes?' I asked.

	'Oh, nothing much,' said Maxim. 'They have been getting the rooms in the east wing ready for us. There is a lovely view of the rose-garden from there. You go and make friends with Mrs Danvers. I'll come up later.'

	I got up slowly and went out with Frith into the hall. I did not want to be alone with Mrs Danvers. The hall seemed very big, and my footsteps sounded very loud on the stone floor.

	Mrs Danvers was standing at the top of the wide flight of stairs. Her dark eyes watched me as I walked slowly up the stairs towards her. 'I hope I haven't kept you waiting,' I said.

	'It is my duty to wait for you, Madam,' Mrs Danvers said. 'I'm here to carry out your orders.'

	She led me along a wide passage. We passed through doors and up and down wide stairs. At last Mrs Danvers opened a door leading into a small room. This room led into a large, light bedroom with wide windows. I went at once to a window and looked out. The rose-garden lay below me. Beyond the rose-garden, the smooth grass stretched to the woods.

	'You can't see the sea from here,' I said, turning to Mrs Danvers.

	'No, not from this wing,' she answered, 'and you can't hear it either. You would never know the sea was so near.'

	Mrs Danvers spoke in a strange way, as though this was somehow important to her.

	'I'm sorry about that; I like the sea,' I said. 'But this is a very charming room. I'm sure I shall be comfortable here.'

	'Mr de Winter gave very careful orders in his letter about this room. The rooms here have been specially arranged for you.'

	'Then this was not his bedroom before?'

	'Oh, no, Madam. He has never used this room.'

	There was silence. I did not know what to say. I wished Mrs Danvers would go away.

	'I suppose you have been at Manderley for many years,' I said.

	'Yes, Madam. I came here when the first Mrs de Winter was a bride.' Her voice was suddenly harsh. There was some colour in her pale face now. And for a moment I saw a look of hatred in her eyes.

	'Mrs Danvers,' I heard myself saying, 'I hope we shall be friends. This sort of life is new to me. I do want to make Mr de Winter happy. I know I can leave the housekeeping to you. I shan't want to make any changes.'

	'Very well,' she said. 'I hope you will be satisfied. I have been looking after the house for the past year. When the late Mrs de Winter was alive, there were lots of parties and visitors, of course. She liked to look after everything herself.'

	'I would rather leave it to you, Mrs Danvers,' I said. 'And I'm sure we'll be very comfortable in these rooms.'

	'Mr de Winter said you would rather be on this side of the house. They used the rooms in the west wing when Mrs de Winter was alive. The windows there look down to the sea.'

	There was a sound outside the door and Mrs Danvers stopped talking. Maxim came into the room.

	'Well, what do you think?' Maxim said to me. 'I hope you like the rooms. I think you've done very well, Mrs Danvers.'

	'Thank you, sir,' she said. Then she turned and went quietly out of the room.

	Maxim walked to the window. 'I love the rose-garden,' he said. 'There's something very quiet and peaceful about this room. How did you get on with Mrs Danvers? She's a strange woman in many ways. I think that some of the young servants are afraid of her.'

	'I expect we'll get on well when she knows me better,' I said. 'She may not like me at first, of course.'

	'Not like you? Why shouldn't she like you?' said Maxim and he came across the room and kissed me gently.

	'Let's forget about Mrs Danvers,' he said. 'Come along, and I'll show you Manderley.'

	I felt happier as I walked through the house with Maxim. We looked at the pictures in the long gallery and at most of the rooms downstairs. Maxim put his arm round my shoulder. I began to feel that Manderley really was my home.

	After dinner, we sat in the library. The curtains were drawn and more logs put on the fire. It was new for us to sit together quietly like this. In Italy we had walked about in the evenings, or gone for a drive. Maxim sat in the chair to the left of the fireplace.

	He picked up the paper. He put a cushion behind his head and lit a cigarette.

	This is what he always did, I thought. This is what he did before he knew me. It is what he has done every evening for years.

	Maxim did not look at me. He went on reading his paper. He was comfortable, the master of his house. I poured myself another cup of coffee. I bent down to the dog and stroked its soft ears.

	Suddenly I shivered as though a door had opened behind me. Someone else had sat in my chair. Someone else had poured coffee and stroked the dog. I was sitting in Rebecca's chair. I was leaning against Rebecca's cushion. The dog, Jasper, came to me because in the past he had come to Rebecca.



	Chapter six

	In the Morning-Room

	Life at Manderley was very carefully planned. The same things happened at the same time every day. I remember our first morning there very clearly. I had slept well and came downstairs a little after nine o'clock. To my surprise, I found that Maxim had nearly finished his breakfast.

	Maxim looked up at me and smiled.

	'I always get up early here,' he said. 'Looking after Manderley takes a lot of my time. I work very hard. But you don't have to. Help yourself to anything you want.'

	I remember the size of that breakfast. It was the normal Manderley breakfast, but far too much for two people. As I took an egg and some coffee, I wondered what happened to the food that was left. Would it be eaten or thrown away? I would never know of course. I would certainly be too afraid to ask.

	'My sister, Beatrice, is coming over to lunch with her husband,' Maxim told me. 'She invited herself, of course. I suppose she wants to have a look at you.'

	They're coming today?' I said, feeling less happy than before.

	'Yes, but she won't stay long. I think you'll like Beatrice. She believes in telling the truth. If she doesn't like you, she'll tell you so.'

	Maxim stood up and lit a cigarette.

	'I've so many things to do this morning. Why don't you go into the garden. You don't mind being alone, do you?'

	'Of course not,' I said. 'I shall be perfectly happy.'

	But I did not feel very happy as Maxim walked out of the room. I had thought we would spend our first morning at Manderley together.

	I had thought that perhaps we would walk down to the sea, or sit under the great tree on the lawn.

	I finished my breakfast alone. I left the dining-room and went into the library. The room was cold. The fire was laid, but not lit. I looked round for a box of matches, but I could not find one. I went across the hall and into the dining-room once more. Yes, there was a box of matches on the table. I picked it up. At that moment, Frith came into the room.

	'Oh, Frith,' I said awkwardly, 'I could not find any matches. I thought I would light the fire in the library. It's rather cold in there.'

	'The fire in the library is not usually lit until the afternoon, Madam,' he said. 'Mrs de Winter always used the morning-room before lunch. There is a good fire in there. Of course, I can give orders for the fire in the library to be lit.'

	'Oh no,' I said. 'I'll go into the morning-room. Thank you, Frith.'

	'Mrs de Winter always wrote her letters in the morning-room after breakfast. The house telephone is there too, if you want to talk to Mrs Danvers.'

	'Thank you, Frith,' I said. I went into the hall again, I did not know which way to go. I could not tell Frith that I had never seen the morning-room. Maxim had not shown it to me the night before.

	'You go through the drawing-room to the morning-room, Madam,' Frith said, watching me. 'Then turn to your left.'

	'Thank you, Frith,' I said. I felt very stupid.

	I found my way into the little morning-room. I was glad to see the dog, Jasper, there, sitting in front of the fire.

	The morning-room was quite small and very different from the library. It was a woman's room, graceful and charming. Someone had chosen everything in this room with the greatest care. Each chair, each rug, each small ornament had been put there to make the room perfect.

	Flowers filled the room, glowing blood-red flowers. They were the same flowers we had seen in the drive. A beautiful old writing-desk stood near the window. I went over and opened the desk carefully. Every drawer was labelled and everything was in order. Inside one of the drawers was a flat leather book: 'Guests at Manderley'. I opened the book. The writing inside the book and the writing on the labels was the same. I had seen that tall sloping writing before. It was Rebecca's writing. This was Rebecca's desk. I sat down and opened the Guest Book. Every page was covered with the same writing.

	I felt that Rebecca would come back into the room at any moment. The mistress of the house would come in and find me, a stranger, sitting at her desk.

	Suddenly the telephone on the desk began to ring. My heart jumped. I picked up the phone. 'Who is it?' I said. 'Who do you want?'

	'Mrs de Winter?' said a hard, deep voice, 'Mrs de Winter?'

	My hand was shaking. 'I'm afraid you have made a mistake,' I said. 'Mrs de Winter has been dead for over a year.'

	I suddenly realized what I had said.

	'It's Mrs Danvers, Madam,' said the voice. 'I'm speaking to you on the house telephone.'

	'I'm so sorry, Mrs Danvers,' I said. 'I didn't know what I was saying. I did not expect the telephone to ring.'

	'I wondered if you had seen the menus for the day. You will find the list on the desk beside you.'

	I found the piece of paper and looked at it quickly.

	'Yes, Mrs Danvers. Yes, very nice indeed.'

	'I'm very sorry to have disturbed you, Madam.'

	'You didn't disturb me at all. Thank you, Mrs Danvers,' I said.

	I put down the phone and looked at the desk. I felt very stupid. Rebecca would not have answered like that. I thought of Rebecca sitting at that desk. Here she had chosen her guests and written letters to her friends. Who could I write to? I knew nobody. Then I thought of Mrs Van Hopper, far away in New York. I took a piece of paper and a pen.

	'Dear Mrs Van Hopper,' I began. As I wrote I noticed my own handwriting for the first time. How weak and childish it was! It was like the writing of a schoolgirl.



	Chapter seven

	You Are So Very Different...

	When I heard the sound of a car in the drive, I stood up in sudden fear. Beatrice and her husband had arrived. They were earlier than I expected. And Maxim had not come back. I could not meet them by myself.

	I ran quickly out of the morning-room. I took a door to the left. I was in a stone corridor. A servant stared at me in surprise. I hurried up some stairs, hoping that I could find my way to my bedroom in the east wing. I could stay there until Maxim came back.

	Somehow I lost my way. But I went on and came to a wide staircase. I went up it. All was quiet and dark. I was in a corridor with doors on either side. I walked on and at last I came to a long window. I looked out. Below me I could see green lawns and the sea. The sea was bright green, with white-topped waves. It was closer than I thought, much closer. I knew then that I had walked right round the house. I was standing in the corridor of the west wing. Yes, Mrs Danvers was right, you could hear the sea from here.

	I was glad that my rooms were in the east wing. I loved the quiet beauty of the rose-garden. The sea was too near here. As I turned to go back to the stairs, I heard a door open behind me. Mrs Danvers stood there. We stared at one another for a moment without speaking.

	'I lost my way,' I said, 'I was trying to find my room.'

	'This is the west wing,' she said. 'Did you go into any of the rooms? If you wish to see them, please tell me. I could show them to you now.'

	I shook my head. 'No, no thank you,' I said. 'I must go downstairs.' As I began to walk towards the stairs, Mrs Danvers followed me.

	'If you want to see the rooms in the west wing, I can show them to you at any time.'

	'It's very kind of you, Mrs Danvers,' I said. 'I will let you know.' Mrs Danvers walked beside me.

	'Major and Mrs Lacy have been here some time,' she said. 'Didn't you hear their car? Frith took them to the morning-room. I think you know your way now, don't you?'

	'Yes, Mrs Danvers,' I said. I knew then that she had been watching me, laughing at my fear. As I went into the drawing-room, I looked back. Mrs Danvers was still watching me from the top of the stairs.

	I could hear the sound of voices from the morning-room. I stood for a moment and then walked in.

	'Here she is at last,' Maxim said. 'Where have you been hiding? Here is Beatrice and this is Giles. And this is Frank Crawley, our agent.'

	Beatrice was tall, broad-shouldered and very much like Maxim. She shook hands with me and said to Maxim, 'She's quite different from what I expected. Not like your description at all.'

	Everyone laughed, but they seemed friendly. Giles was a big, heavy man. His eyes smiled at me from behind his thick glasses. Frank Crawley was a thin man with a pleasant, worried face. Maxim had told me how hard Frank Crawley worked for Manderley. The men began to talk together and I had to answer Beatrice's questions.

	'What do you think of Manderley?' she asked me.

	'I haven't seen much of it yet,' I said. 'The house is beautiful, of course. I haven't seen the gardens, but I'm sure I shall never get tired of them. I love walking. I can swim too, when the weather is warmer.'

	'My dear, the water is always far too cold here,' said Beatrice.

	'I don't mind that, I love swimming. Is it safe to swim in the bays?' Everyone stopped talking. I realized what I had said. Rebecca had been drowned in the bay. I could not look at Maxim. I bent down to stroke the dog's head. Then, thank God, Frith came in to say that lunch was ready. Beatrice walked with me through the hall.

	'You know,' she said, 'you are much younger than I expected. Tell me, do you love Maxim very much?'

	Beatrice looked at my surprised face and laughed.

	'Don't answer,' she said. 'I can see that you do. Maxim looks very well. We were all very worried about him last year. But of course, you know the whole story.'

	But Beatrice was wrong. I did not know what had happened down in the bay. Maxim had told me nothing. I had never asked him about Rebecca's death.

	Beatrice talked to Maxim all through lunch. Frank Crawley told me a lot about Manderley. I could see that he loved it as much as Maxim did.

	When lunch was over, I could see that Maxim was tired. I wished we hadn't had visitors so soon. I took Beatrice out on to the terrace. She asked me how I had met Maxim. I told her about Mrs Van Hopper and how surprised she had been.

	'It was rather a shock to us too,' Beatrice said. 'Maxim said in his letter that you were very young and pretty. We expected a very modern sort of girl.' Beatrice laughed and I laughed with her.

	'Poor Maxim. He had a terrible time,' Beatrice said. 'Let's hope you have made him forget all about it. He loves Manderley so much. But you never know what he is thinking. How do you get on with Mrs Danvers?'

	I was surprised by Beatrice's question.

	'She frightens me a little,' I said.

	'She may try to make things unpleasant for you,' Beatrice went on. 'She's very jealous, of course. She must hate you being here.'

	'Why?' I asked. 'Why must she hate me being at Manderley?'

	'My dear child,' Beatrice answered slowly, 'I thought Maxim had told you. Mrs Danvers adored Rebecca. She still does.'

	At that moment, the men came out of the house. A servant brought rugs and chairs and we all sat under the great tree on the lawn. I hoped everyone would go soon. I wanted to be alone with Maxim. I was sitting on a rug, leaning against Maxim's chair. I listened to the others talking. The afternoon was sleepy and peaceful. Everything was quiet and still. Even the sea seemed far away.

	This is what I wanted, I thought. This is how I thought life at Manderley would be.

	This moment was safe. It could not be touched. Here we sat together, Maxim and I, hand in hand. The past and the future did not matter at all. At this moment I was not afraid.

	The moment passed. Beatrice stood up.

	'We must be going,' she said. 'We've got people coming to dinner.' We all got up and Giles looked up at the sky.

	'I'm afraid we're going to have some rain,' he said. We all walked slowly back to the drive.

	Beatrice took my hand. Then she bent down and kissed me. 'Forgive me if I've asked you a lot of rude questions, my dear. As I said before, you are not what we expected. You are so very different from Rebecca.'

	As we reached the car, the sun went behind a cloud and a little rain began to fall. Maxim and I watched the car drive away. We turned and walked back into the house.



	Chapter eight

	The Happy Valley

	As we stood in the hall, Maxim put his arm round my shoulders.

	'Thank God that's over,' he said. 'Get a coat quickly and let's go out. Never mind the rain, I want a walk.'

	Maxim looked white and ill. Had Beatrice said something to make him angry? I could not remember.

	'Just a moment,' I said. 'I'll get my coat from upstairs.'

	'There are plenty of raincoats downstairs,' Maxim said. 'Robert, will you fetch a coat for Mrs de Winter?'

	Maxim was standing in the drive now, calling to Jasper. 'Come on, you lazy little fellow. You're too fat.'

	Jasper ran round in circles, barking loudly. The young servant, Robert, ran out of the hall, carrying a raincoat. I put it on quickly. It was too big, of course, and too long. But Maxim was waiting impatiently and there was no time to change the coat. We set off together across the lawns to the woods. Jasper ran on in front.

	'I soon get tired of my family,' Maxim said. 'Beatrice is very kind-hearted, but she always says the wrong thing.'

	I was not sure what Beatrice had said and I thought it better not to ask.

	'What did you think of Beatrice?' Maxim asked me. 'What did she talk to you about after lunch?'

	'I think I did most of the talking,' I said. 'I was telling her about how we met. She said I was quite different from what she expected.'

	'What on earth did she expect?'

	'Someone much smarter, I think. A modern young woman.'

	Maxim did not answer. He bent down and threw a stick for Jasper to run after.

	We climbed the grass bank above the lawns and walked down into the woods. The trees grew very close together over our heads and it was very dark. We walked on last year's leaves. The green shoots of flowers were beginning to show through. Jasper was silent now, with his nose to the ground.

	We came to a clearing in the woods. There were two paths, going in opposite directions. Jasper ran on ahead and took the right-hand path without waiting for us.

	'Not that way,' called Maxim. 'Come on, old boy.'

	The dog looked back at us. He stood there, wagging his tail.

	'Why does he want to go that way?' I asked.

	'I suppose he's used to it,' Maxim said quickly. 'It leads to a small bay where we used to keep a boat. Come on, Jasper, old boy, this way.'

	We turned on to the left-hand path, not saying anything. I looked over my shoulder and saw that Jasper was following us.

	'This path brings us to the valley I told you about,' Maxim told me. 'You can smell the flowers already. Never mind the rain, it will bring out the scent.'

	Maxim seemed all right again now, happy and cheerful. He began talking about Frank Crawley. He told me what a good agent he was and how he loved Manderley.

	I held Maxim's arm and looked up into his face. Talking about Manderley always made Maxim happy again.

	We had reached the top of a small hill. The path ran down into a little valley, by the side of a stream.

	'There,' said Maxim, 'look at that.'

	There were no dark trees in this valley, no thick bushes. On either side of the narrow path stood high graceful bushes covered with flowers. The flowers were pink, white and gold. They were things of beauty and grace. The soft summer rain fell and the air was full of a sweet scent. There was no sound except for the noise of a little stream and the quiet rain on the leaves. When Maxim spoke, his voice was gentle and low.

	'We call it the Happy Valley,' he said.

	We stood still, not speaking. I looked down at the clear white flowers. Maxim picked up a fallen flower and gave it to me. As I rubbed it between my hands, the scent was sweet and strong.

	A bird began to sing, a high, clear sound. Other birds began to sing too. I had never been in so beautiful a place. As we walked along the path, drops of rain fell on my hands and face. I held Maxim's hand. The Happy Valley was the heart of Manderley, the Manderley I would soon know and love.



	Chapter nine

	The Cottage in the Bay

	We came to the end of the path. The bushes made an arch over our heads so that we had to bend down. I stood straight again, brushing the rain from my head. I saw that the valley was behind us. We were standing in a little narrow bay. There, almost at our feet was the sea.

	Maxim looked down at me, smiling at the surprise on my face.

	'It is a surprise, isn't it?' he said. 'No one ever expects it.'

	Maxim picked up a stone and threw it across the beach for Jasper.

	'Fetch it, good boy,' he said. Jasper ran after the stone, barking with excitement.

	We both went down to the water's edge and threw more stones. The tide was coming up into the bay and the water was beginning to cover the stones. Maxim turned to me, laughing and wiping the hair out of his eyes. I rolled up the long sleeves of the raincoat. It was a happy moment.

	Then we saw that Jasper had gone. We called and whistled, but he did not come.

	'Has he gone back to the Happy Valley?' I asked.

	'He was by that rock a minute ago,' said Maxim.

	We walked up the beach towards the valley again.

	'Jasper, Jasper,' called Maxim.

	In the distance, beyond a line of rocks to the right of the beach, I heard a sharp bark.

	'Do you hear that?' I said. 'He's gone over this way.' I began to climb up the wet rocks.

	'Come back,' Maxim said sharply, 'we don't want to go that way.'

	'I must get him,' I said. 'He may be hurt.'

	'He's all right,' said Maxim. 'Leave him. He knows the way home.'

	I began climbing over the rocks towards Jasper. I thought Maxim was being very unkind. I got to the top of the largest rock and looked beyond it. There was another bay. A small stone wall across the bay made it into a small harbour. In the bay was a green and white buoy, but no boat.

	The woods came right down to the shore. At the edge of the woods was a low stone building, a cottage or a boat-house. There was a man standing on the shore, dressed like a fisherman. Jasper was barking at him and running round and round. The man took no notice of the dog.

	'Jasper,' I shouted, 'Jasper, come here.'

	The dog looked up, but he did not come to me. I looked back, but I could not see Maxim. I climbed down into the bay and the man looked at me for the first time. There was something strange about him. He had small, stupid looking eyes. His face was fat and round and he had thick, red lips.

	'Bad weather, isn't it?' the man said with a stupid smile.

	'It's not very nice weather,' I said. 'Come on Jasper, we must go home now.'

	But Jasper ran away, barking.

	'Have you got any string?' I asked the man. 'I want something to tie the dog. He won't follow me.'

	'I know that dog, it's not yours. It comes from the house.'

	'He's Mr de Winter's dog,' I said kindly. 'I must take him back.'

	The man said nothing, but stared at me in the same stupid way.

	I walked up the shore to the cottage. Perhaps there was some string there. The grass round the little house had grown very long. The windows had pieces of wood over them. I pushed at the door. To my surprise it opened and I went inside.

	The room was furnished and there were books on the shelves.

	But everything was covered with thick dust. The air was damp and still. Another door at the end of the room led into a small boat-house. I saw some string on a shelf and an old knife. I cut a piece of string for Jasper and went out of the cottage. There was something frightening about that small, dark room. I was glad to be outside again.

	The man was still watching me, staring like a child. Jasper was quiet now and let me tie the string.

	'I saw you go in there,' the man said. 'She doesn't go in there now. She's gone in the sea. She won't come back, will she?'

	'No,' I said. 'She won't come back.'

	'I didn't say anything, did I?' The man's eyes were full of fear. He turned away and walked back towards the sea.

	Maxim was waiting for me beside the rocks. He looked angry.

	'I'm sorry,' I said. 'I had to get some string for Jasper. Who is that man?'

	'That's Ben. He's a bit mad, but he won't hurt you. Where did you get that string?'

	'I found it in the cottage. The door was open. There's dust everywhere. The place ought to be cleaned.'

	'The door should be locked,' Maxim said. He was walking very fast now. He went up past the cottage and on to a path through the woods. It was very different here from the Happy Valley. The path was steep and the trees were thick, and dark. It was cold now and my legs ached. Jasper was tired too, and walked very slowly.

	'Come on, Jasper, for God's sake,' said Maxim angrily. 'Pull at that string, can't you?' he said to me.

	'It's your fault,' I said, 'you walk so fast.'

	'If you had listened to me, we would be home by now. There was no need for you to go after Jasper.'

	'I thought you would come with me,' I answered.

	'Why should I run after the damned dog?' Maxim said, not looking at me.

	'That's an excuse. You didn't want to go over the rocks,' I answered.

	'All right, I didn't. I didn't want to go to the other bay. I never go near the place or that damned cottage. If you had my memories, you would not go there either. You wouldn't talk about it or even think about it.'

	Maxim's face was white. His eyes had a dark, lost look. I took his hand and held it tight.

	'Please, Maxim, please,' I said. 'I don't want you to look like that. I'm sorry, darling. Please don't let us quarrel.'

	'We should have stayed in Italy,' Maxim said. 'I was a fool to bring you back to Manderley.'

	I had to run to keep up with him now. At last we came to the top of the path and out on to the lawn. Maxim's face was hard. He walked straight into the house and spoke to Frith.

	'We want tea at once,' said Maxim. Then he went quickly into the library and shut the door.

	I tried to keep back my tears. Frith must not see them. I turned away as he helped me off with the raincoat. He picked up a handkerchief.

	'Is this yours, Madam?' he said.

	I put the handkerchief in my pocket and walked slowly across the hall to the library. Maxim was sitting in his usual chair, with Jasper at his feet. I walked across the room and knelt down by Maxim's chair.

	'Don't be angry with me any more,' I said.

	Maxim looked down at me.

	'I'm not angry with you,' he said.

	'But I've made you unhappy,' I replied. 'I want you to be happy so much. I love you.'

	'Do you?' he said. His eyes were full of pain and fear.

	'What is it, darling?' I said. 'Why do you look like that?'

	The door opened before Maxim could answer. It was Frith and Robert with the tea. The small table was put near the fire and covered with the white cloth. Frith brought in the silver teapot and kettle. Then came the cups, the sandwiches and cakes. Everything was the same as yesterday. When the servants had gone, I looked at Maxim's face. The colour had come back into it. He took a sandwich.

	'Pour me a cup of tea, darling,' he said to me. 'And forgive me for being so unkind.'

	There was nothing more to say. Maxim smiled at me and picked up his paper. Maxim's smile was like a pat on the head given to Jasper.

	I was not hungry and I felt very tired. I gave Jasper a piece of cake and took out the handkerchief to wipe my hands. The handkerchief was not mine. It must have come from the raincoat pocket. There were some letters in the corner - a tall "R" and "de W." It was Rebecca's. The raincoat, too wide, too long for me, must have been hers too. Rebecca had worn that raincoat. She had left the handkerchief in the pocket. I could smell a scent, a scent I knew. I shut my eyes and tried to remember what it was.

	Suddenly I knew. The scent on the handkerchief was the scent of the flowers in the Happy Valley. Was there nowhere I could escape from Rebecca?



	Chapter ten

	Questions and Answers

	The weather was wet and cold for over a week. We did not go down to the beach again. I could see the sea from the terrace and the lawns. It looked cold and grey. When I stood on the terrace, I could hear the sound of great waves on the shore. I began to understand why some people hated the low, angry voice of the sea. I was glad that our rooms were in the east wing. If I could not sleep, I went to the window and looked out on to the rose-garden. I was not troubled by the sea's unhappy music.

	Sometimes I thought about the cottage down in the bay. There were so many questions I wanted to ask Maxim. I could not forget the lost look in Maxim's eyes. I could not forget his words: 'I was a fool to bring you back to Manderley.'

	It was all my fault. I had gone down into the bay. I had reminded Maxim of the past. We lived our lives together sleeping, eating, walking. But, every hour of the day, the past made a wall between us.

	I became nervous and afraid. I did not want anyone to talk about the sea or boats. When visitors came to Manderley, I was shy and awkward. I knew that they compared me with Rebecca. She had been charming, interested in everyone. I was dull and stupid, like a schoolgirl.

	One afternoon, I was having tea alone when the wife of the bishop called. She was a kind woman and tried hard to make me talk. At last she said,

	'Will your husband hold the Manderley Fancy Dress Ball this year? I remember the last one so well. It was such a lovely sight. I shall never forget it.'

	I smiled and said, 'We have not decided. There have been so many things to do.'

	I could not tell the woman that Maxim had never spoken about the ball.

	'Manderley looked so beautiful,' the bishop's wife went on. 'And there was dancing, and music and flowers everywhere.'

	'Yes,' I said. 'Yes, I must ask Maxim about it.'

	'We came to a garden-party too, one summer,' the bishop's wife went on. 'It was a lovely day. We all had tea in the rose-garden. It was such a clever idea. Of course, she was a clever person.'

	She stopped, her face rather red. I heard myself saying, 'Rebecca must have been a wonderful person...'

	I had said her name at last. 'Rebecca.' I had said it aloud.

	'You never met her then?' the woman asked. 'Yes, she was a lovely person. So full of life. Everyone loved her.'

	'She was so good at everything too,' I said. 'Clever, beautiful and fond of sport.'

	'Rebecca was certainly beautiful,' my visitor went on. 'I remember her on the night of the Ball. She had a cloud of dark hair. Her skin was very white. And she had such a lovely dress.'

	'She looked after everything in the house, too,' I said. 'I'm afraid I leave it all to the housekeeper.'

	'Oh well, you are very young, aren't you? We can't all do everything. I must go now. Do ask your husband to have another ball.'

	'Yes, of course I will.'

	I sat in the library after my visitor had gone. I thought about Manderley, full of people in beautiful costumes, dancing in the hall. I thought of Rebecca, lively and beautiful, arranging everything. What must people think about me?

	I suddenly sat up straight. I did not mind. I did not care. I was Mrs de Winter now, not Rebecca. I decided that I would find out more about the Fancy Dress Ball. But I did not want to ask Maxim.

	Later that afternoon, Frank Crawley came up to the house.

	'I have been hearing about the Fancy Dress Ball, Frank,' I said. 'I did not know you had dances here.'

	Frank did not reply at once. Then he said, 'The Manderley Ball was held every year. People came from miles around. They even came down from London.'

	'It must have been a lot of work,' I said. 'I suppose Rebecca did most of it.'

	Frank looked straight ahead.

	'We all helped,' he said.

	'Will you ask Maxim about the Ball?' I asked. 'It does seem a good idea.'

	Frank did not answer me.

	'I went into that cottage in the bay a few days ago,' I said. 'It's very dirty. Why doesn't someone do something about it?'

	'Maxim would tell me if he wanted anything done,' Frank replied.

	'Are they Rebecca's things?' I asked.

	'Yes,' Frank said.

	'Did Rebecca use the cottage a lot?'

	'Yes, she did. She slept in the cottage sometimes. She had moonlight picnics on the shore.'

	I noticed that Frank always called Rebecca 'she'. He never used her name.

	'Why is there a buoy in the bay?' I asked. 'There's no boat there. What happened to it? Was it the boat Rebecca was sailing when she died?'

	'Yes,' said Frank, quietly. 'It turned over and sank. She was washed overboard and drowned. The sea is sometimes very rough in the bay.'

	'Couldn't anyone have helped her?' I asked.

	'Nobody saw the accident. Nobody knew she was sailing. She often went out alone like that.'

	'When did they find her?' I felt I must know everything now. I had been thinking about that terrible night for so long.

	'They found her two months later. The sea had carried her forty miles up the coast. Maxim had to identify the body.'

	Suddenly I was ashamed of all my questions.

	'Frank,' I said, 'I'm sorry I asked you all those questions. But everything is so strange to me at Manderley. And when I meet anyone new, I know what they are thinking: "How different she is from Rebecca." '

	'Mrs de Winter, you mustn't think that,' said Frank, looking at me for the first time. 'I am so glad you have married Maxim. It will make such a difference to his life. And Manderley needs someone like you, someone young, fresh and charming.'

	'But Rebecca was so charming - and clever. People still remember her.'

	'Maxim would be very unhappy to hear you talking like this, Mrs de Winter. Forget the past, as Maxim has done. None of us want to bring back the past. Your job here is to lead us away from it.'

	I was much happier now. But I had to ask Frank one more question.

	Tell me, Frank,' I said. 'Was Rebecca very beautiful?'

	Frank turned away from me so that I could not see his face.

	'Yes,' he said slowly. 'Yes, I suppose she was the most beautiful woman I ever saw in my life.'



	Chapter eleven

	The China Cupid

	Frank had told me to forget the past. I wanted to. But Frank did not sit in the morning room every day as I did. He did not sit at Rebecca's desk and touch the things she had touched. Dear God, I did not want to think about Rebecca. I wanted to be happy. I wanted Maxim to be happy too. But Rebecca was always in my thoughts and dreams.

	Beatrice, Maxim's sister, had promised to give me a wedding present. She did not forget. One day, Robert brought a large parcel into the morning-room where I was sitting alone. I cut the string excitedly and tore off the dark brown paper. Beatrice had sent me four big books about painting. She knew that I enjoyed sketching and she had really tried to please me.

	I was glad to have something at Manderley that belonged to me. I looked round the room for somewhere to put the books. I stood them in a row on top of the desk and looked at them. But the books were far too heavy. First one fell and then the others followed. A little china ornament which always stood on the desk was knocked on to the floor. The ornament broke into many pieces. It was a beautiful little cupid and one of the loveliest things in the house. I was suddenly very frightened. I found an envelope in a drawer and carefully put the pieces of china into it. Then, like a child, I hid the envelope in the desk. I decided to put my new books in the library and I said nothing about the cupid.

	The following day, after lunch, Frith brought our coffee to the library as usual. Instead of leaving, he stood by Maxim's chair.

	'Could I speak to you, sir?' he said. Maxim looked up from his paper.

	'Yes, Frith, what is it?'

	'It's about Robert, sir. He's very upset. Mrs Danvers has accused him of taking a valuable ornament from the morning-room. Mrs Danvers noticed it was missing late this morning. She says that Robert must have taken it or broken it. Robert says he knows nothing about it.'

	'Perhaps it was one of the maids,' said Maxim. I knew he hated any kind of trouble with the servants.

	'No, sir. No one except Robert has been in the room, apart from Madam, of course. Mrs Danvers doesn't let the maids clean the morning-room.'

	'Well, Mrs Danvers had better come and see me. What ornament was it?'

	'The china cupid, sir. It stands on the desk.'

	'Oh dear,' said Maxim. 'That's very valuable. It must be found. I'll see Mrs Danvers at once.'

	'Very good, sir,' said Frith and quietly left the room.

	'Darling,' I said to Maxim when we were alone, 'I meant to tell you before, but I forgot. I broke the cupid yesterday.'

	'You broke it? Why didn't you say so when Frith was here? You'll have to explain to Mrs Danvers now.'

	'Oh no. Please, Maxim, you tell her. Let me go upstairs.'

	'Don't be silly,' said Maxim angrily. 'Anyone would think you were afraid of Mrs Danvers.'

	'I am afraid of her. At least not afraid, but...'

	The door opened without a sound and Mrs Danvers came into the room. I looked nervously at Maxim. His face was half amused, half angry.

	'It's all a mistake, Mrs Danvers,' Maxim told her. 'Mrs de Winter broke the cupid herself. She forgot to tell us.'

	I felt like a child again.

	'I'm so sorry,' I said, 'I never thought Robert would get into trouble.'

	'Is it possible to repair the cupid, Madam?' said Mrs Danvers. She did not seem surprised. I felt she had known the truth all the time.

	'I'm afraid not,' I said. 'It's in hundreds of pieces.'

	'What did you do with the pieces?' said Maxim.

	They are in an envelope in a drawer of the writing desk.'

	'Find the pieces, Mrs Danvers. Try to get them mended in London.'

	'I never thought that Mrs de Winter had broken the ornament,' said Mrs Danvers. As she left the room I could see the scorn and hatred in her eyes.

	'I'm very sorry, darling,' I said. 'It was very silly and careless of me.'

	'Forget it,' said Maxim. 'But you do act strangely sometimes. More like a servant than the mistress of Manderley. Even when we have visitors, you sit on the edge of your chair and say only "yes" and "no".'

	'I can't help being shy.'

	'I know you can't, darling. But you must learn to hide it.'

	'I do try. But I'm not used to this kind of life. People look at me and ask me so many questions.'

	'What does it matter? They are interested in us, that's all.'

	'They can't find me very interesting,' I said. 'I suppose that's why you married me. You knew I was dull and quiet. No one would ever gossip about me.'

	Maxim threw his paper on the ground and got up from his chair. His face was dark with anger and his voice was hard.

	'What do you know about any gossip down here?' he said. 'Who's been talking to you?'

	'No one. No one at all.'

	Maxim stared at me.

	'Perhaps I did a very selfish thing when I married you,' he said slowly. 'I am so much older than you.'

	I felt cold and frightened.

	'Age doesn't matter,' I said. 'I'm happy. You know I love you more than anything else in the world. I love Manderley too. I love everything here. You're happy too, darling, aren't you?'

	Maxim did not answer. He stood staring out of the window.

	'If you don't think we're happy, you must tell me,' I went on. 'I don't want you to lie to me.'

	Maxim took my face in his hands.

	'How can I answer you?' he said. 'If you are happy, then we are both happy.'

	He kissed me and walked across the room.

	'But you are disappointed in me. You think I am not right for Manderley. If only I hadn't broken that cupid. Was it very valuable?'

	'I think so,' Maxim answered. 'It was a wedding present. Rebecca knew a lot about china.'

	Maxim went on staring straight in front of him.

	He is thinking about Rebecca, I said to myself. I have broken one of their wedding presents.

	Maxim went back to his chair and picked up his paper. I sat on the long seat under the window. After a time, Jasper came to me and climbed on to my lap.



	Chapter twelve

	In the West Wing

	Maxim had to go up to London at the end of June. It was the first time that I had been left alone at Manderley. I was sure that Maxim would have a terrible accident or even be killed. I was too worried to eat any lunch. At about two o'clock, Robert brought me a message. Maxim had arrived safely in London after a good journey. I felt happy again and also rather hungry. I went back into the dining-room and took an apple and some biscuits. Then I called Jasper and we went together into the woods.

	As I sat there I felt happier than I had ever been at Manderley. I could not understand it. I had not wanted Maxim to go to London, but now I was glad to be alone.

	I walked through the Happy Valley to the bay. The sea was very calm. Jasper ran up the rocks leading to the next bay.

	'Not that way, Jasper,' I called. The dog took no notice.

	Oh well, it doesn't matter, I thought. Maxim isn't here. And I climbed over the rocks after Jasper.

	The tide was out and there was very little water in the bay. The white and green buoy was still there. I could read the name on it now: Je Reviens. A strange name for a boat - "I'll come back". And that boat would never come back now.

	I walked slowly across the beach to the cottage. The sun was shining today and the cottage did not look frightening any more. I pushed open the door. Everything was exactly as before. There was a sound in the boat-house and Jasper ran up to the doorway, barking angrily.

	'Is anybody there?' I said.

	I looked through the door and saw Ben sitting by the wall. He looked very frightened.

	'I think you should come out,' I said. 'Mr de Winter doesn't like people coming in here.'

	Ben followed me out into the sunshine.

	'I'm not doing anything wrong,' he said. 'You won't lock me up, will you?'

	His whole body was shaking with fear and tears were rolling down his fat, round face.

	'I didn't do anything. I didn't tell anyone,' he said.

	'That's all right, Ben. No one's going to hurt you. But don't go into the cottage again.'

	Ben smiled.

	'You're not like the other one,' he said. 'She was tall and dark. She had eyes like a snake. She came here at night. She saw me once, looking at her. "You'll be locked up. People will hurt you," she said. But you won't lock me up, will you?'

	'No, of course not, Ben,' I said.

	Ben smiled again and went off down the beach to the sea. I went up towards the wood. Jasper followed me. When I looked back, Ben had gone. But I had a strange feeling that someone was watching me. Someone tall and dark, who watched and listened.

	I started to run up the path and did not feel safe until I reached the lawn. The house stood there, safe and secure. The sun shone on something metal in the drive. A green sports car was parked there. I had never seen it before and I hoped the visitor did not want to stay to tea.

	As I walked across the lawn, I looked up at the west wing. One of the shutters was open and a man stood at the window. Then another figure, dressed in black, closed the shutter. I was sure it was Mrs Danvers. But who was the man? And why had he come when Maxim was away in London?

	I walked up the steps, through the hall and into the morning-room. I could smell cigarette smoke. Then I heard voices and, without thinking, I hid behind the door. I heard Mrs Danvers say, 'I expect she went into the library. Wait here while I go and see.'

	She was talking about me of course. I did not know what to do. Jasper had moved towards the drawing-room, wagging his tail.

	'Hallo, Jasper, old boy,' said a man's voice and Jasper ran back into the morning-room. The man followed. He saw me standing behind the door. I have never seen anyone more surprised.

	'I beg your pardon,' the man said, looking down at me with a rather unpleasant smile. He was a big, handsome man, but his face was red and his eyes were a hard blue. His breath smelt of whisky.

	'I'm so sorry,' he said. 'I called to see Danny. She's an old friend of mine.'

	He lit a cigarette and looked round the room.

	'How's old Max?' he asked.

	'Maxim's very well, he's in London,' I said.

	'What? He's left you all alone? That's not fair, is it?' The man gave an unpleasant laugh. I did not like him at all.

	At that moment, Mrs Danvers came back. She looked at me angrily.

	'Well, Danny,' the man said, 'aren't you going to introduce me to the new bride?'

	'This is Mr Favell, Madam,' said Mrs Danvers.

	'How do you do?' I said politely. 'Will you stay to tea?'

	The man laughed again.

	'Now isn't that kind, Danny,' he said. 'But I had better be going. Come and look at my car,' he said to me. 'It's a good car. Much faster than the one Max has.'

	I did not like the way that Favell spoke about Maxim. I did not want to look at his car. But I followed him out into the hall.

	'Goodbye, Danny. Take care of yourself. You know my telephone number.'

	'Dear old Manderley,' Favell said as we walked out of the house. 'What do you think of it? Aren't you lonely living here?'

	'I'm very fond of Manderley,' I said.

	'I have enjoyed meeting you,' Favell said, standing by his car. 'But I'd rather you didn't tell Max about my visit. I'm afraid your husband doesn't like me very much. He might be cross with poor old Danny.'

	'No, all right,' I said awkwardly. 'I won't say anything to Maxim.'

	He got into the car and started the engine.

	'That's very kind,' he said. 'Perhaps I'll come back and see you one day. Goodbye.'

	Favell drove away noisily and much too fast. I walked slowly back to the house. Mrs Danvers had gone. I wondered who Favell was. He had certainly been to Manderley before. And, like Rebecca, he called Maxim 'Max'. Had Favell known Rebecca? What had he been doing in the west wing? There were some very valuable things in the house. Perhaps the man was a thief.

	I decided to go up to the west wing. I must see that everything was all right. The house seemed very quiet as I began to walk up the stairs. My heart was beating in a strange, excited way.

	I was again in the corridor where I had stood on my first morning at Manderley. I turned the handle of the nearest door and went inside. Everything was dark. I found the light and switched it on. I was surprised to see that the room was completely furnished. There was no dust and everything was clean and tidy. The room, a bedroom, was the most beautiful I had ever seen. There were flowers on the dressing table and on the table beside the bed. A satin dressing-gown lay on a chair. There was a pair of slippers under a chair.

	I walked slowly into the middle of the room. No, it was not used. It was not lived in any more. The air was not fresh. Rebecca would never come back to this room again. I could hear the sea clearly. I went to the window and opened a shutter. Yes, I was standing at the window where I had seen Mrs Danvers and Favell.

	I felt afraid and my legs began to tremble. I sat down on the stool by the dressing-table. I looked round the room, the most beautiful in Manderley. A room that was never used now.

	I got up and went to the chair. I touched the satin dressing-gown. I picked up the slippers and held them in my hand.

	On the bed lay Rebecca's nightdress. I went to the bed and held the nightdress to my face. It was cold and smelt of the flowers in the Happy Valley.

	As I stood looking down at the bed, I heard a step behind me.

	I turned quickly. It was Mrs Danvers. I shall never forget the look on her face. It was a look of strange, terrible excitement.

	She came nearer and I could feel her breath on my face.

	'Is there anything the matter, Madam? Are you feeling unwell?' Mrs Danvers said quietly.

	'I did not expect to see you here, Mrs Danvers. I came up to fasten one of the shutters.'

	'I will fasten it,' Mrs Danvers said.

	Mrs Danvers came back from the window and stood beside me.

	'You opened the shutter yourself, didn't you?' she said. 'You wanted to see this room, didn't you? Now you are here, let me show you everything.'

	Her voice now was as soft and sweet as honey.

	'It's a lovely room, isn't it? That was her bed. I keep it just as it was. This was her nightdress. She was wearing it the night before she died. These are her slippers.'

	Mrs Danvers put the slippers back under the chair and walked across the room to a large wardrobe.

	'All her evening clothes are here. Her furs, too. Mr de Winter was always buying clothes for her, beautiful clothes.'

	Mrs Danvers held my arm tightly with her long thin fingers. Her eyes looked deep into mine.

	'I blame myself for the accident,' she said. 'I was out that evening. When I came in, I heard she had gone down to the bay. I was worried. The wind was blowing hard. Mr de Winter came in at about eleven. The wind was blowing harder, and still she had not come back.

	'I sat on my bed until after five. Then I put on my coat and went down to the bay. I saw at once that the boat had gone.'

	Mrs Danvers' hand fell back to her side.

	'That is why Mr de Winter doesn't use these rooms any more. Listen to the sea.'

	Even with the shutters and windows closed, I could hear the dull, harsh sound of the sea in the bay.

	'I come into these room and dust them every day,' Mrs Danvers said. 'If you want to come again, ask me. No one comes here but me.

	'Sometimes I feel she is standing here, behind me. I feel her everywhere. In the morning-room and in the hall. You feel her too, don't you?'

	I tried to smile, but I felt sick and ill.

	'Do you think she can see us now?' Mrs Danvers asked me. 'Do you think the dead watch the living?'

	'I don't know,' I said. 'I don't know.'

	'Sometimes I think she watches you and Mr de Winter together,' Mrs Danvers whispered.

	We stood there by the door, staring at one another. I could not take my eyes away from hers. Then I turned and walked into the corridor. I went down the stairs and through the door to the east wing. I pushed open the door to my own bedroom. I shut the door of the room and locked it.

	Then I lay down on my bed and closed my eyes. I felt terribly sick.



	Chapter thirteen

	More About Jack Favell

	Maxim rang up the next morning. I heard the phone ring while I was having breakfast and Frith answered it. I hoped that Maxim would ask for me but he did not.

	'Mr de Winter will be back at about six this evening,' Frith told me.

	'All right, Frith. Thank you,' I said.

	I went on eating breakfast as slowly as I could. Jasper was sitting at my feet. I wondered what I should do all day. I had slept badly. I could not forget my visit to the west wing. I knew now how much Mrs Danvers hated me.

	About ten o'clock, the telephone rang again. This time it was Beatrice.

	'Well, my dear, how are you?' she said. 'Shall I come and have lunch with you today?'

	'I'd like you to come very much, Beatrice,' I said.

	'All right, my dear. See you later.'

	I put the phone down. I was glad that Beatrice was coming. It gave me something to look forward to. I wandered out on to the lawn. I felt different from yesterday. I wanted Maxim to come home.

	I tried not to remember my visit to the west wing. But I could not stop thinking about Favell and his friendship with Mrs Danvers. I began to feel that Mrs Danvers was watching me. There were so many rooms that Maxim and I never used. It was easy for Mrs Danvers to watch me from one of their windows.

	Beatrice arrived by car at about half past twelve. This time I went out to the drive to meet her.

	'Well, my dear, here I am,' she said. 'It's a lovely day, isn't it?'

	She gave me a kiss and then looked at me carefully.

	'You don't look well,' Beatrice said. 'You are much too thin. Your face is pale, too. What's wrong with you?'

	'Nothing,' I said. 'My face is always pale.'

	'You looked quite different when I saw you before,' Beatrice told me. 'You are not going to have a baby, are you?'

	'No, I don't think so,' I said.

	'Well, I hope you will sometime. Maxim would be so happy to have a son. What have you been doing with yourself? Have you done much sketching? Did you like the books I sent you? Have you had anyone to stay?'

	I had forgotten that Beatrice asked so many questions.

	'No, we've had no one to stay. People come to tea sometimes, of course.'

	I wondered whether to tell Beatrice about Mrs Danvers' visitor, Favell. I did not want Beatrice to tell Maxim about the visit. But I did want to find out more about the man.

	'Have you ever heard of a man called Jack Favell, Beatrice?' I asked her.

	'Jack Favell?' said Beatrice slowly. 'Yes, I do know the name. Wait a minute - Jack Favell. Yes, of course. I remember him now. He's an awful man. I met him once, years ago.'

	'He was here yesterday,' I told her. 'He came to see Mrs Danvers.'

	Beatrice did not look at me.

	'Oh well,' she said, 'I suppose he knows Mrs Danvers quite well.'

	'But why?' I asked.

	'Jack Favell is Rebecca's cousin,' Beatrice said. 'I think he came to Manderley quite a lot when Rebecca was alive. I'm not sure.'

	'I did not like him,' I said.

	'No, I don't suppose that you did,' Beatrice answered.

	I hoped that she would tell me more about Favell, but she did not. For the rest of the time we talked about other things.

	Beatrice stayed for tea and left soon afterwards. She had promised to meet her husband, Giles, at the station.

	'I hope you won't be so thin next time I see you,' Beatrice said as she got into her car. 'Give Maxim my love. Look after him, and look after yourself, too.'

	I watched Beatrice's car go down the drive. Maxim would not be back for another hour. I did not feel like sitting in the house by myself. I called Jasper and we went for a walk through the woods. But I did not go near the sea. I missed Maxim now and felt lonely without him. Beatrice's questions had made me feel tired too.

	When I came back from my walk, I saw Maxim's car standing in front of the house. At once, I felt much happier. I ran quickly up the steps and into the hall. As I walked towards the library, I heard the sound of voices. One voice was Maxim's, very loud and angry. The door was shut, but I could hear what he said.

	'You can tell Favell to keep away from Manderley. Tell him I said so,' Maxim was saying.

	'I know he was here. Never mind who told me. His car was seen here yesterday. If you want to meet him, meet him somewhere else. I don't want that man at Manderley. I won't even have him in the gardens. I'm telling you for the last time.'

	I heard footsteps. I ran quickly up the stairs and hid myself.

	Mrs Danvers came out of the library. She shut the door and walked up the stairs. Her face was grey with anger and the look in her eyes frightened me. Thank God she did not know I was watching her. Mrs Danvers went through the door to the west wing.

	I waited a moment and then went downstairs and into the library. Maxim was standing by the window. When he heard the door open, he turned round quickly.

	I smiled and held out my hand to him.

	'Oh, it's you,' Maxim said.

	I could tell that he was very angry. His face was white and his mouth hard. I took his hand in mine.

	'I missed you so much,' I said. 'I hate being here without you.'

	'Do you?' Maxim said. He did not say anything about Mrs Danvers or Favell.

	'Are you worried about something?' I asked.

	'I've had a long day,' Maxim answered. 'And London was very hot and noisy. I always hate going there.'

	Maxim lit a cigarette and moved away from me. I knew then that he was not going to tell me about his anger with Mrs Danvers. Maxim still thought of me as a child - someone who must not hear unpleasant things. But he was wrong. I felt I was growing up a little more every day. My life at Manderley was turning me into a woman.



	Chapter fourteen

	Preparations for the Ball

	It was on a Sunday afternoon when someone spoke about the Fancy Dress Ball again. Frank Crawley had come to lunch and the three of us were hoping to have a quiet afternoon. But as we were walking out to the big tree on the lawn, we heard a car in the drive. We had to go back into the house to welcome the visitors. Very soon, more people arrived and then some more.

	They all stayed to tea, of course. As we sat in the drawing-room eating cake and sandwiches, one of our visitors suddenly said to Maxim, 'Oh, Mr de Winter. There is something I must ask you. Are you having a Fancy Dress Ball at Manderley this year?'

	Maxim answered quietly.

	'I haven't thought about it,' he said. 'And I don't think anyone else has, either.'

	'Oh, but you are wrong,' said another woman. 'We have all been thinking about it. We used to enjoy the Manderley Ball so much.'

	'Well, I don't know,' said Maxim. 'There would be a great deal to do. You had better ask Frank Crawley. He would do most of the work.'

	'I don't mind the work,' said Frank, looking at me. 'It's for Maxim and Mrs de Winter to decide.'

	Everyone looked at me and started to talk at once.

	'Now, Mrs de Winter, you must help us. Your husband will listen to you. After all, you are a new bride. The Ball will be for you.'

	'Yes, of course,' said a man, 'we all missed your wedding. There ought to be some kind of party here at Manderley.'

	Everyone laughed and clapped their hands.

	Maxim looked at me.

	'What about you? Would you like it?' he said.

	I did not know what Maxim was thinking. Perhaps he thought I was too shy to want the Ball.

	'I think I rather like the idea,' I said with a smile.

	Maxim turned away.

	'All right, then, Frank. We'll have the dance. Mrs Danvers can help you. She will know what to do. Now, if we've all finished tea, we'll go into the garden.'

	We all went outside. Our visitors were talking happily now about their costumes for the Ball. I felt excited too.

	'What will you wear?' I said to Maxim.

	'I never wear fancy dress,' Maxim replied. 'I'm the host, so I can do as I like.'

	'What shall I wear?' I said. 'I've no idea at all.'

	Maxim smiled at me.

	'If you look pretty, I don't mind what you put on,' he told me.

	'All right,' I said. 'My costume will be a secret. I shall keep it as a surprise.'

	Maxim laughed and patted me on the shoulder. As usual, he was treating me like a child. I did not want to be a child. I wanted to be a grown-up woman.

	I shall wear a beautiful dress at the Ball, I told myself. Everyone will say how charming I am. They will think of me as the real Mrs de Winter at last. Maxim will love me as his wife and forget about Rebecca.

	Soon everyone at Manderley was talking about the Fancy Dress Ball. My little maid, Clarice, spoke of nothing else.

	'Oh, Madam, it's so exciting,' she said. 'I'm looking forward to it so much.'

	The preparations went on. Frank was very busy and so was Mrs Danvers. I saw very little of her, and I was glad.

	I began to get worried about my costume. I did not know what to wear. I looked through the books that Beatrice had given me. I made sketches of some of the costumes, but I did not like any of them. I wanted something that was pretty and simple too.

	That evening, as I was getting ready for dinner, there was a knock at my bedroom door. To my surprise, it was Mrs Danvers. She was holding a piece of paper in her hand. It was a drawing of a costume which I had sketched and then thrown away.

	'I found this, Madam,' Mrs Danvers said. 'I thought you had thrown it away by mistake.'

	'No, Mrs Danvers, I don't want it, thank you,' I said quickly.

	I hoped she would go, but she stood at the door.

	'So you haven't decided what to wear, Madam,' Mrs Danvers said in a friendly voice.

	'No, I haven't decided yet,' I replied.

	'Perhaps you could copy one of the pictures in the gallery,' Mrs Danvers suggested. 'Many of them would make beautiful costumes. What does Mr de Winter think?'

	'I don't know,' I said. 'I wanted to surprise him. I was going to keep my costume a secret.'

	Mrs Danvers looked pleased at my words.

	'Then I suggest that you have your costume made in London, Madam. There is a shop in Bond Street that would do it really well. I have always liked the picture of the girl in white,' Mrs Danvers went on in the same friendly way.

	'The picture is about two hundred years old. The girl's wearing a very simple dress. It would be easy to copy.'

	I did not know what to say. I knew the picture well. I wished I had thought of the idea myself.

	'Thank you, Mrs Danvers,' I said.

	Mrs Danvers went out quietly. I wondered why she was so friendly. Perhaps Maxim's anger had frightened her a little.

	As I went down to dinner, I stopped in front of the picture of the young girl. Her name was Caroline de Winter and she had been famous for her beauty. The dress was very simple, with short sleeves and a long, full skirt. Her hair was in curls. I would have to wear a wig over my own straight hair. I felt very excited. I was glad that I had chosen my costume at last. I said nothing to Maxim. The next day I made a sketch of the picture. Then I sent the drawing to the shop in London with careful instructions about the dress and the wig.

	The preparations for the great day went on. No one expected me to do anything. Slowly, the great house began to change. Furniture was moved as the great hall was prepared for dancing. Coloured lights were hung in the trees outside. There were flowers everywhere. Hundreds of them were brought in from the garden and Mrs Danvers knew exactly how to arrange them. Manderley took on a new beauty. I had never seen the old house looking so lovely.



	Chapter fifteen

	Miss Caroline de Winter

	On the day of the Ball, Maxim and I had lunch with Frank. My dress and the wig had arrived and they both looked perfect. Maxim and Frank asked me about my costume but I told them nothing. The secret made me feel excited and important.

	'You won't know it's me,' I told them. 'You will both have the surprise of your lives.'

	Maxim and I went back to the house after lunch. The band had arrived and we welcomed the men. The afternoon seemed very long. I thought about going for a walk. Then suddenly, it was tea-time and Beatrice and her husband, Giles, had arrived.

	'This is like old times,' said Beatrice, looking around. 'Everything is as beautiful as ever. What's everyone going to wear? I suppose you refuse to wear fancy dress, Maxim?'

	'Of course,' Maxim said. 'I prefer to be comfortable.'

	'I'm going to dress as an Arab,' said Giles. 'I got the idea from a friend.'

	'What about you, Mrs Lacy?' Frank said to Beatrice.

	'I'm in Eastern dress, too. I'm wearing a veil and lots of jewellery. I'll be cool and comfortable. That's all that matters.'

	Beatrice turned to me.

	'And what is our hostess going to wear?' she asked. 'The Ball is for you, after all. We all expect you to wear something really special.'

	'Don't ask her,' said Maxim. 'She won't tell anyone. She's had the dress made in London.'

	'It's quite simple really,' I said.

	'What fun it all is,' said Beatrice. 'I'm getting excited already.'

	'You've got her to thank for it,' said Maxim, smiling at me.

	Everyone looked at me and smiled. I felt pleased and happy. This Ball was for me because I was a bride, the new Mrs de Winter. Manderley had been made into a place of light and beauty, just for me.

	'What's the time?' I said. 'I think we ought to be getting ready.'

	I found Clarice waiting for me in my bedroom, her face full of excitement. I locked the door and took the dress from its box. It fitted perfectly. I looked at myself in the mirror. I smiled. I felt different already. I was someone more exciting and interesting than my usual self.

	'Give me the wig, Clarice,' I said. 'Be careful, the curls mustn't be flat.'

	I brushed back my own straight hair. Carefully, I put the wig in place. I looked in the mirror again. The wig and the tightly fitting dress made me almost beautiful.

	'Oh, Clarice,' I said. 'What will Mr de Winter say?'

	There was a knock on the door.

	'Who's there?' I called. 'You can't come in.'

	'It's me, my dear,' said Beatrice. 'Are you ready? I want to have a look at you.'

	'No, no,' I said, 'you can't come in. Tell Maxim that he can't come in either. I'll come down when I'm ready.'

	I looked in the mirror again. My eyes looked larger and the curls made a soft cloud round my head. I lifted the skirt of the dress in my hands.

	'Unlock the door,' I said to Clarice. 'I'm going down.'

	I stood in the gallery and looked down on the hall below.

	There was Giles in his white Arab costume. Beatrice was wearing a long green dress. Frank was dressed as a sailor. Only Maxim was wearing evening clothes.

	'I don't know what she's doing,' I heard Maxim say. 'What's the time, Frank? She must be down soon.'

	I looked up at the picture of Caroline de Winter. Yes, her dress was exactly like mine and she had the same curled hair. The band was playing softly in the gallery.

	'Beat the drum,' I said, 'and call out: Miss Caroline de Winter.'

	The drum sounded. Everyone looked up.

	'Miss Caroline de Winter,' the man shouted.

	I stood at the top of the stairs, smiling. I expected everyone to laugh and clap as I walked down the stairs.

	Nobody laughed. Nobody clapped. They all stared at me without moving. I smiled at Maxim.

	'How do you do, Mr de Winter?' I said.

	Maxim stared up at me. His face was completely white. Something was wrong. Why was Maxim looking like that? He moved towards the stairs.

	'What the hell do you think you're doing?' he said.

	His eyes were on fire with anger.

	'It's the picture,' I said. 'The one in the gallery.'

	There was a long silence. Still nobody moved.

	'What is it?' I said. 'What have I done?'

	When Maxim answered, his voice was cold and hard. 'Go and take off that dress! It doesn't matter what you wear. Any evening dress will do. Go quickly, before anyone comes.' I could not speak. I stood staring at Maxim. 'What are you standing there for?' he asked me. 'Didn't you hear what I said?'

	I turned and ran up the stairs. My eyes were full of tears. I did not know what I was doing. The door to the west wing was open. Mrs Danvers was standing there. I shall never forget the terrible look on her face. It was a look of joy - of joy and the most terrible hate. She stood there, smiling at me.

	Then I ran from her, back to my room, tripping and nearly falling over my long skirt.

	Clarice was waiting for me in my bedroom. She had heard what had happened. When she saw my face, Clarice started to cry.

	'It doesn't matter, Clarice,' I said. 'Help me take off this dress. Quickly.'

	'What will you wear, Madam?' Clarice asked me. 'I don't know,' I said. 'Leave me alone now. I'll be all right. Go down and enjoy the party. Don't tell anyone what has happened.'

	After Clarice had gone, someone knocked at the door. It opened and Beatrice came in.

	'My dear,' she said, 'are you all right?' I put a hand up to my head and took off the wig. 'Of course I knew at once that it was a mistake,' Beatrice said. 'You could not have known.'

	'Known what?' I said, turning to look at her.

	'Why, about your costume. It was exactly what Rebecca wore at the last Fancy Dress Ball here. As you stood on the stairs, I thought for one terrible moment...'

	'I ought to have known,' I said.

	I was thinking of Mrs Danvers. She had planned this. She had known what would happen.

	'How could you know?' said Beatrice. 'But it was a terrible shock to Maxim. He thinks that you did it as a joke. He thinks that is why you kept your dress a secret. But he will understand when you speak to him. I'm going to tell everyone that your dress didn't fit.'

	I did not say anything.

	'Now, what can you wear?' Beatrice said. 'Here, this blue dress is very pretty. Put this on.'

	'No,' I said. 'I'm not going down.'

	Beatrice stared at me before she spoke.

	'But, my dear, you must. It will look so strange.'

	I felt very tired.

	'What does it matter?' I said.

	Beatrice looked shocked at my words.

	'Think of Maxim. You must come down for him,' she said.

	'I can't, I can't,' I answered.

	Beatrice stared at me.

	'I must go down now,' she said at last. 'They will be waiting for me at dinner. I'll tell Maxim you'll be down in a minute, shall I?'

	I did not answer and Beatrice walked slowly to the door and went out.

	After a long time I got up from the bed where I was sitting. I walked across to the window. I could see the coloured lights in the trees. I walked back to the dressing-table and looked at my white face and red eyes in the mirror. Then slowly I washed my face and combed my hair. I put the white dress and the wig back into the box. I never wanted to see them again. I picked up the blue dress and put it on.

	When I was ready, I opened the door and walked along the corridor. Everything was still and quiet. Then I heard the sound of voices. The door of the dining-room was open. The guests were coming out of dinner. Someone laughed.

	I walked slowly down the stairs to meet them.

	I remember very little of the first party at Manderley. It was the first and the last we ever held there. I remember that Frank tried to make me drink a little champagne. I remember Beatrice smiling at me. I remember dancing with Giles.

	The band played and people danced. I stood there smiling at everyone. Maxim stood beside me. His eyes were cold and hard, not the eyes of the man I knew and loved. All through that long night, Maxim never looked at me.

	Once, Beatrice came up to me and said, 'Why don't you sit down? You look like death.'

	What was the time? I did not know. The night passed, hour after hour. Then at last Giles came up to me and said, 'Come and look at the fireworks on the terrace.'

	I remember standing on the terrace and staring up at the sky. The fireworks rose into the sky and turned into stars and flowers. The sky was red and gold. Every window of the house was coloured by the falling lights. The grey walls of Manderley looked heavy and dark.

	Then suddenly, the sky was dark too. The fireworks were over. I heard the sound of cars starting in the drive. 'They're beginning to go,' I thought. 'Thank God, they're beginning to go.'

	People came up to me to say goodbye.

	'Such a wonderful party,' they said. 'Thank you so much for a wonderful evening. The best party I've been to for a long time.'

	I shook hands with them all. I smiled.

	'I'm so glad, so glad,' I said. I could think of no other words.

	Maxim had gone with Frank to stand in the drive. Beatrice Came up to me.

	'Well done, my dear,' she said. 'The Ball was a great success. No one had any idea about... you know. You must go to bed now. You look very tired. Have your breakfast in bed.'

	'Yes. Yes, perhaps I shall,' I said.

	'I'll tell Maxim you've gone up to bed, shall I?'

	'Yes, please, Beatrice.'

	'All right, my dear. Sleep well.'

	I walked slowly into the house. The lights had been turned off. The rooms were empty. I went up the stairs and along the corridor to my room. It was almost light now and a bird had started to sing. I undressed slowly and got into bed. I lay back and closed my eyes.

	My body was tired, but my mind would not rest. I wondered how long Maxim would be. The little clock by my bed ticked away the minutes. I lay on my side, watching it. An hour went by. But Maxim did not come.



	Chapter sixteen

	'Why Don't You Jump?'

	I fell asleep at about seven o'clock. When I woke up again, it was after eleven. Clarice had brought me some tea. It was cold now, but I drank it. Maxim's bed was empty. He had not come to bed at all. I sat up, looking straight in front of me.

	My marriage was a failure. It had failed after only three months. I was too young for Maxim, I knew too little about the world. The fact that I loved him made no difference. It was not the sort of love he needed. Maxim was not in love with me. He had never loved me. He did not belong to me, he belonged to Rebecca. Rebecca was the real Mrs de Winter.

	I could never be the mistress of Manderley. Wherever I walked, wherever I sat, I saw Rebecca. I knew her well. I knew her tall, slim figure, her small face and clear white skin. If I ever heard her voice, I would know it. Rebecca - always Rebecca. I would never escape from Rebecca. She was too strong for me.

	I got out of bed and opened the curtains. Sunlight filled the room. I could not hide in my bedroom any longer. I had a bath, dressed and went downstairs. The servants had been very busy. The rooms were clean and tidy. The flowers had gone. Soon there would be nothing to remind us of the Fancy Dress Ball.

	I met Robert in the dining-room.

	'Good morning, Robert,' I said. 'Have you seen Mr de Winter anywhere?'

	'He went out soon after breakfast, Madam. He has not been in since.'

	I went into the small room behind the library and picked up the telephone. Perhaps Maxim was with Frank. I had to talk to Maxim. I had to explain about last night.

	'Frank, it's me,' I said when he answered. 'Where's Maxim?'

	'I don't know. I haven't seen him,' Frank said. 'How did he sleep? How was he at breakfast?'

	'Frank,' I said slowly, 'Maxim did not come to bed last night.'

	There was silence.

	'I was afraid something like that would happen,' Frank said at last.

	'Where do you think he's gone?' I asked. 'I must see him. I've got to explain about last night. Maxim thinks I did it as a joke.'

	I could not stop my tears now. They poured down my face as I spoke.

	'You mustn't talk like that,' Frank said. 'Let me come up and see you.'

	'No,' I said. 'It has happened. Nothing can be changed now. Perhaps that's a good thing. I understand things more clearly now.'

	'What do you mean?' said Frank, quickly.

	'Maxim doesn't love me, he loves Rebecca,' I said. 'He's never forgotten her. He's never loved me, Frank. It's always Rebecca, Rebecca, Rebecca.'

	I heard Frank cry out.

	'I've got to come and see you,' he said.

	I put down the telephone stood up. I did not want to see Frank. He could not help me. No one could help me, but myself.

	Perhaps I would never see Maxim again. Perhaps Maxim had left me and would never come back. I could not get these thoughts out of my mind.

	I went to the window and looked out. A fog had come up from the sea. I could not see the woods. It was very hot, but the sun was hidden behind the wall of fog. I could hear the sea and I could smell it in the fog. I walked out of the house and on to the lawn. I looked back at the house. One of the shutters in the west wing had been pulled back. Someone was standing there, looking down at me. For a moment, I thought that it was Maxim. Then the figure moved and I saw that it was Mrs Danvers.

	I felt that she knew about my tears. She had planned all this to happen. This was her triumph - hers and Rebecca's.

	I remembered Mrs Danvers smiling at me, like a devil. But she was a living woman like myself. She was not dead, like Rebecca. I could not speak to Rebecca, but I could speak to Mrs Danvers.

	I walked back across the lawn. I went through the house, along the dark silent corridor of the west wing to Rebecca's room. I turned the handle of the door and went inside.

	Mrs Danvers was still standing by the window. The shutter was folded back. She turned to me and I saw that her eyes were red with crying. There were dark shadows on her white face.

	'You've done what you wanted, Mrs Danvers,' I said. 'You wanted this to happen, didn't you? Are you pleased now? Are you happy?'

	She turned her head away from me.

	'Why did you ever come to Manderley?' she said. 'Nobody wanted you. We were all right until you came.'

	'You seem to forget that I love Mr de Winter,' I said.

	'If you loved him, you would never have married him,' Mrs Danvers said.

	'Why do you hate me?' I asked. 'What have I done to you?'

	'You tried to take Mrs de Winter's place,' she said.

	'But I changed nothing here. I left everything to you. I wanted to be friends with you,' I said.

	She did not answer.

	'Many people marry twice,' I said. 'My marriage to Mr de Winter isn't a crime. Haven't we a right to be happy?'

	'Mr de Winter is not happy,' Mrs Danvers said, looking at me at last. 'Look into his eyes. He's in hell. He has looked like that ever since she died.'

	'It's not true,' I said. 'It's not true. He was happy when we were in Italy together.'

	'Well, he's a man, isn't he?' she said with a hard laugh. 'Every man likes to enjoy his honeymoon.'

	I was suddenly very angry and not afraid of Mrs Danvers any more. I went up to her and shook her by the arm.

	'How dare you speak to me like that? How dare you? You made me wear that dress last night. You wanted to hurt Mr de Winter. Do you think his pain and unhappiness will bring Mrs de Winter back?'

	Mrs Danvers moved away from me.

	'What do I care for his pain?' she said. 'He's never cared about mine. How do you think I've felt, watching you sit in her place, using the things she used? I hear the servants calling you Mrs de Winter. And all the time, the real Mrs de Winter, with her smile and her lovely face is lying cold and dead in the church.'

	Mrs Danvers' face was twisted with pain. Her voice was loud and hard.

	'Mr de Winter deserves his pain, marrying a young girl like you - and only ten months afterwards. Well, he's paying for it now. He knows she is watching him. My lady comes at night and watches him.

	'I looked after her when she was a child. Did you know that?'

	'No,' I said, 'no. What's the use of this, Mrs Danvers? I don't want to hear any more.'

	Mrs Danvers did not seem to hear me. She went on speaking in a high, harsh voice.

	'Mrs de Winter was a lovely child,' she said. 'When she was only twelve years old, the men could not stop looking at her. But even then, she cared for nothing and nobody. And that's how she was when she grew up. She was beaten in the end. But it wasn't a man. It wasn't a woman. The sea got her. The sea was too strong for her in the end.'

	Mrs Danvers began to cry noisily, with her mouth open and her eyes dry.

	'Mrs Danvers, you're not well. You ought to be in bed,' I said.

	She looked at me angrily.

	'Leave me alone. Why shouldn't I cry? What's it to do with you? You came here and thought you could take Mrs de Winter's place. You! Why, even the servants laughed at you when you came to Manderley.'

	'You'd better stop this, Mrs Danvers,' I said. 'You'd better go to your room.'

	'Yes. And then what will you do? You'll go to Mr de Winter and tell him that Mrs Danvers has been unkind to you. You'll go to him like you did when Mr Favell came here.

	'Mr de Winter was jealous of Mr Favell when she was alive. He's jealous now. That shows you he's not forgotten her, doesn't it? Of course Mr de Winter was jealous. She didn't care. She only laughed. All the men fell in love with her, Mr de Winter, Mr Favell, Mr Crawley. It was like a game to her.'

	'I don't want to know,' I said. 'I don't want to know.'

	Mrs Danvers came close to me and put her face near to mine.

	'It's no use, is it?' she said. 'She's the real Mrs de Winter, not you.'

	I backed away from her, towards the window. She took my hand and held it.

	'Why don't you go?' she said again. 'He doesn't want you, he never did. He can't forget her. He wants to be alone in the house again, with her.'

	She pushed me towards the open window. I could see the stones of the terrace below. Beyond the terrace was a white wall of fog.

	'Look down there,' Mrs Danvers said. 'It's easy, isn't it? Why don't you jump? It wouldn't hurt. It's not like drowning. Why don't you try it? Why don't you go?'

	The fog came in through the open window, damp and thick. I held on to the window ledge with both hands.

	'Don't be afraid,' said Mrs Danvers. 'I won't push you. You can jump. You're not happy. Mr de Winter doesn't love you. Why don't you jump now?'

	The fog was thicker than before. There was fog below and all around me. If I jumped now, I would not see the stones. The fall would kill me. Maxim did not love me.

	'Go on,' whispered Mrs Danvers. 'Go on, don't be afraid.'

	I shut my eyes. My fingers ached from holding the ledge. The thick fog made me forget my unhappiness. I could forget about loving Maxim. I could forget about Rebecca. I would not have to think about Rebecca any more...

	A loud explosion shook the window where we stood. The glass cracked. I opened my eyes and stared at Mrs Danvers. The first explosion was followed by another, then a third and a fourth.

	'What is it?' I said. 'What has happened?'

	Mrs Danvers let go my arm. She stared out of the window into the fog.

	'It's the rockets,' she said. 'There must be a ship in trouble in the bay.'

	We listened, staring into the white fog together. And then we heard the sound of footsteps on the terrace below us.



	Chapter seventeen

	Rebecca Has Won

	It was Maxim down on the terrace. I could not see him, but I could hear his voice. I heard Frith answer from the hall.

	'A ship's hit the rocks in the bay,' Maxim called out. 'The fog is terrible out there. Tell Mrs Danvers to have food and drink ready for the men. I'm going back to the bay to see if I can do anything.'

	Mrs Danvers moved back from the window.

	'We had better go down,' she said in her usual voice. 'Frith will be looking for me. Be careful of your hands. I am going to close the window.'

	Then she went to the door and held it open for me.

	'When you see Mr de Winter, Madam, please tell him there will be a hot meal ready for the men at any time.'

	I stared at her.

	'Yes,' I said. 'Yes, Mrs Danvers.'

	She turned her back on me and went along the corridor. I walked slowly out of the room. I felt as though I had just woken up from a long sleep. When I reached the hall, I saw Frith.

	'Did you hear the rockets, Madam?' he said. 'Mr de Winter's gone down to the bay. He went across the lawn only a few minutes ago.'

	I went out on to the terrace. The fog was beginning to clear and I could see the woods again. I looked up at the window above my head. It looked very high. I suddenly felt very hot. My head ached and my hands were wet. I stood very still. Then for the first time I realized that Maxim had not gone away. I had heard his voice and he was down there in the bay. Maxim was safe. Nothing else mattered if Maxim was safe.

	I began to walk along the path through the woods. The fog had almost gone now. When I came to the bay, I could see the ship at once. She was on the rocks about two miles from the shore. There were some small boats near her.

	I climbed up the path to the cliffs above the bay. Frank was there talking to a coast-guard, but I could not see Maxim.

	'They're going to send a diver down soon, Mrs de Winter,' said the coastguard. 'They want to see if they can get the ship off the rocks.'

	'Have you seen Maxim?' I asked Frank.

	'He's taken one of the sailors to hospital,' Frank told me. 'The man was hurt. Maxim is always a great help at times like this. What are you going to do? Can I walk back with you to the house?'

	'I think I'll stay here. I want to see the diver go down,' I said.

	'Very well,' Frank said. 'I shall be at the office if you want me.'

	The coastguard looked at his watch.

	'Well, I must be getting along too,' he said. 'Good afternoon.'

	The sea was calm now. The diver went down and came up again. Nothing else happened. It was very hot. I sat on the cliffs for a long time doing nothing, thinking of nothing.

	When I looked at my watch again, it was three o'clock. I got up and walked down the hill to the bay. When I came to the other side, I saw Ben. He stood there, smiling at me.

	'Seen the big ship?' he said.

	'Yes,' I said. 'She's on the rocks, isn't she?'

	'She'll break up,' he said. 'The big ship won't go down like the little one. She won't come back, will she?'

	'Who?' I asked him.

	'Her,' he said. 'The other one.'

	I did not know what Ben meant. I left him and walked towards the path through the woods. I did not look at the cottage. As I went up the path, a strange fear began to fill my heart.

	The house looked very peaceful. Manderley was a place of safety and looked more beautiful than I had ever seen it. I felt, for the first time, that it was my home. I belonged to Manderley and Manderley belonged to me.

	I went through the house and into the library. Jasper was not there. He must have gone out with Maxim. I suddenly felt very hungry, and so I asked Robert to bring in the tea. I still had a strange feeling of fear in my heart. I felt that I was waiting for something - something terrible.

	As I sat drinking my tea, Robert came back into the room.

	'Captain Searle, the harbour-master, is on the phone, Madam,' he told me. 'He wants to come here and speak to Mr de Winter at once. He says it's very important.'

	'Mr de Winter is not back yet, Robert,' I told him. 'Ask Captain Searle to come up and wait.'

	Robert went out of the room with the message. I wondered what Captain Searle wanted to say. It must be something to do with the ship out in the bay. But why did he want to see Maxim?

	Captain Searle came into the library about fifteen minutes later. He looked at me with his bright blue eyes.

	'I'm afraid I've got some bad news for Mr de Winter. I don't know how to tell him.'

	'What sort of news, Captain Searle?' I asked him.

	'Well, Mrs de Winter, it's not very pleasant. When we sent the diver down to look at the ship, he found something else. It was a little sailing boat. It's the boat that belonged to the late Mrs de Winter.'

	'I'm sorry,' I said. 'Must you tell Mr de Winter? Can't the boat be left there?'

	'The man found something else,' Captain Searle answered slowly. 'The cabin door was closed, so he broke a window and looked in. Then he got a terrible fright. There was a body in there on the cabin floor. I must tell your husband, Mrs de Winter. The police will have to know too.'

	This was the reason for the strange fear in my heart. Someone had been in the boat with Rebecca that night.

	'Do we have to tell him?' I asked.

	'I've got to do my duty,' Captain Searle said. He stopped. The door had opened. It was Maxim.

	'Hello,' he said. 'Is something the matter, Captain Searle?'

	I felt very afraid. I went out of the room quickly and shut the door behind me. Jasper was in the hall and he walked out on to the terrace with me. I sat down. I must not fail Maxim now.

	I sat on the terrace until I heard Captain Searle's car drive away. Then I stood up and walked slowly back to the library.

	Maxim was standing by the window. I went and stood beside him. I took his hand and held it against my face.

	'I want to help you, Maxim,' I said. 'I've grown up, you know. I'm not a child any more.'

	Maxim put his arm round me and held me closely.

	'I was angry with you last night, wasn't I?' he said.

	'Maxim,' I asked him, 'can't we start again?'

	'It's too late, my darling, too late,' he said. 'We've lost our chance of happiness. Something has happened. Something I've dreamt about, night after night. I knew we could never be happy.'

	Maxim held both my hands and looked into my face.

	'Rebecca has won,' he said.

	I stared at him. My heart began to beat fast. What was Maxim trying to tell me?

	'I always knew this would happen,' Maxim said. 'Rebecca has kept us apart all this time. I remember how she looked at me before she died. I remember her smile. She knew this would happen. She knew she would win in the end.'

	'Maxim,' I whispered. 'What are you trying to tell me? Captain Searle told me about the boat. There was someone sailing with Rebecca. You have to find out who it was. That's it, isn't it, Maxim?'

	'No,' he said, 'you don't understand. There was no one with Rebecca. She was alone.'

	I stood there watching his face, watching his eyes.

	'It's Rebecca's body lying there on the cabin floor.'

	'No,' I said. 'No!'

	'The woman buried in the church is not Rebecca. I always knew that,' Maxim said. 'Rebecca was not drowned. I killed her. I shot Rebecca in the cottage. I carried her body to the cabin, took the boat out that night and sank it. It's Rebecca who's lying there on the cabin floor. Will you look into my eyes and tell me that you love me now?'



	Chapter eighteen

	The Truth About Rebecca

	It was very quiet in the library. When people have a great shock, they feel nothing at first. I stood beside Maxim and I had no feelings at all. Then Maxim took me in his arms and began to kiss me. I shut my eyes. He had never kissed me like this before.

	'I love you so much,' he whispered.

	This is what I had wanted him to say, every day and every night. But I could feel nothing now.

	Maxim stopped suddenly and pushed me away from him.

	'You see, I was right,' he said. 'It's too late. You don't love me now.'

	'It's not too late,' I said, putting my arms round him. 'I love you more than anything in the world.'

	'It's no use now,' said Maxim. 'We have no time. They've found the boat. They've found Rebecca.'

	I stared at him, not understanding.

	'What will they do?' I said.

	'They will make sure that the body in the cabin is Rebecca. Then they will remember that other body in the church. The other woman - the one I said was Rebecca.'

	'What are we going to do?' I said.

	Maxim did not answer.

	'Does anyone know? Anyone at all?' I said.

	Maxim shook his head.

	'Are you sure Frank doesn't know?' I asked quickly.

	'How could he?' said Maxim. 'There was nobody there but me. It was dark...' He stopped. He sat down on a chair and I went and knelt beside him.

	'Why didn't you tell me?' I whispered.

	'I nearly did, once,' Maxim said. 'But you always seemed so unhappy and so shy.'

	I answered very quietly.

	'I knew you were thinking about Rebecca all the time. How could I ask you to love me when I knew you loved Rebecca?'

	'You thought I loved Rebecca?' he said. 'I hated her. We never loved each other. Rebecca never loved anyone except herself.'

	I sat on the floor, staring at him.

	'She was clever of course,' Maxim went on. 'Everyone thought she was the kindest, the most charming person. When I married her, people told me I was the luckiest man in the world.'

	'I found out the truth five days after we were married. We were in the hills near Monte Carlo. It was the same place I went to with you. Do you remember? She sat there in the car and told me terrible, evil things about herself. Things that I could not tell anyone.'

	Maxim stared out of the window.

	'I did not kill her then,' he said. 'I let her laugh. She knew that I would take her to Manderley. She knew I would never divorce her. I would never tell people all the terrible things she had told me.'

	Maxim came up to me and held out his hands.

	'You hate me, don't you?' he said. 'You can't understand me, can you?'

	I did not say anything. I held his hands against my heart. Only one thing mattered. Maxim did not love Rebecca. He had never loved her, never, never.

	Maxim was talking again.

	'I thought about Manderley too much,' he said. 'I put Manderley first, before anything else. I can't tell you about those terrible years with Rebecca. But she made Manderley the place of beauty it is today. And I accepted everything, because of Manderley.

	'Rebecca was careful at first,' Maxim went on. 'She had a flat in London. She met her friends there. Then she began to grow careless. She invited friends down here, to Manderley. I warned her. I told her that Manderley was mine. Rebecca did not say anything. She only smiled.

	'Then Frank came to me and told me he wanted to leave. He wouldn't say why at first. But I got the truth from him in the end. Rebecca never left him alone. She was always going to his house and asking him to her cottage.

	'Rebecca went up to London for a time. When she came back, she took Giles out sailing with her. I knew what had happened as soon as they came back. Beatrice and Giles never stayed at Manderley again. After that, I knew I could never trust Rebecca with anyone.

	'She had a cousin, an awful man, called Jack Favell. He started to come here when I was away.'

	'I've met him,' I said. 'He came here the day you went to London. I didn't tell you. I didn't want to remind you of Rebecca.'

	'Remind me?' said Maxim. 'Oh God, I never needed to be reminded.

	'Favell often stayed with Rebecca down at the cottage. He is a bad man. He's been in trouble with the police many times. I told Rebecca that I would shoot Favell if he came to Manderley again.

	'Then, one night, I could stand our life here no longer. Rebecca came back from London very late. She went to the cottage. I thought Favell was with her. I went after them. I took a gun to frighten him.'

	Maxim was talking in quick, short sentences. I held his hand tightly.

	'I saw a light in the cottage and went in. To my surprise, Rebecca was alone. She looked ill and strange.

	"This is the end," I told her. "I can't stand any more." Rebecca looked at me and smiled.

	"It won't be easy to divorce me," she said. "Everyone believes our marriage is perfect."

	'Then she stood up and walked towards me.

	"If I had a child, Max," she said, "Everyone would think it was yours. You would like a son, wouldn't you? A boy to grow up at Manderley. And you would never know who his father was."

	'And she smiled at me again. She was smiling when I killed her. The bullet went through her heart.'

	Maxim's voice was very low. He spoke slowly.

	'There was blood all over the floor. I had to get water from the sea to clean the place.

	'There was no moon and it was very dark,' Maxim went on. 'I carried Rebecca's body to the boat. I laid the body on the floor of the cabin. Then I took the boat out into the bay. I wanted to take the boat a good way out, but the wind was too strong for me.

	'I made some holes in the wooden planks with a metal spike. I opened the sea cocks and the sea water flowed in. In a few minutes it had covered my feet. I shut the cabin door behind me, climbed into the dinghy and rowed back. Rebecca's boat was already sinking. I sat and watched it go down.'

	Maxim looked at me.

	'That's all,' he said. 'There's no more to tell.'

	The library was very quiet. We sat there together for some minutes without saying anything. Then Maxim began to speak again.

	'I knew the boat would be found one day,' he said. 'Rebecca knew she would win in the end. I saw her smile when she died.'

	'But Rebecca is dead,' I told him. 'That's what we must remember.'

	'The diver has seen the body. They're going to get the boat up tomorrow morning. They'll find out that it's Rebecca's body in the cabin.'

	'Then you must say you made a mistake about the other body. Nobody saw you that night. We are the only two people who know what happened that night, Maxim.'

	'Yes,' he said. 'Yes, I suppose so.'

	'They will think the boat sank when Rebecca went down into the cabin. They'll think she was trapped there. They'll think that, won't they, Maxim?' I said.

	'I don't know,' Maxim replied slowly. 'I don't know.'

	At that moment, the telephone in the next room began to ring.



	Chapter nineteen

	Colonel Julyan

	Maxim went into the little room and closed the door. I sat there, listening to the sound of Maxim's voice. I was no longer afraid of Rebecca; I did not hate her any more. Maxim and I were going to fight this together. Rebecca had not won, she had lost.

	'That was Colonel Julyan,' said Maxim, as he came back into the room. He is the local magistrate. He has to be there when they get the boat up tomorrow. He asked me if I had made a mistake about the other body.'

	The telephone began to ring again. Maxim answered it quickly and came back into the library.

	'It's begun,' he said.

	'What do you mean?' asked.

	'That was a reporter. The whole thing will be in the papers tomorrow. There's nothing we can do.'

	After dinner, we went back into the library as usual. I sat at Maxim's feet, my head against his knees. In a strange way, we were completely happy.

	Rain fell in the night. When I woke up in the morning, Maxim had already gone out. I went down to breakfast as usual. There were a lot of letters thanking us for the Ball. How far away that seemed! I felt calmer, much older now. I took the letters into the morning-room. To my surprise, the room was dusty and untidy. The windows were tightly closed and some of the flowers were dead. I rang the bell for a maid and when she came, I spoke to her angrily. I wondered why I had been frightened of the servants before.

	The menu for the day lay on the desk. It was the same food as the day before. I crossed everything out and rang for Robert.

	'Tell Mrs Danvers to order something different,' I told him. Then I went out into the garden and cut some roses. Very soon Maxim will be back, I thought. I must be calm and quiet. I took the roses back into the morning-room. It was clean and tidy now.

	As I began to arrange the flowers, there was a knock at the door.

	It was Mrs Danvers, holding the menu in her hand. She looked pale and tired.

	'I don't understand,' she said. 'I'm not used to having messages sent by Robert. When Mrs de Winter wanted any change in the menu, she spoke to me herself.'

	'I am Mrs de Winter now, Mrs Danvers,' I said. 'And I shall do things in my own way.'

	Mrs Danvers stared at me.

	'Is it true,' she asked slowly, 'that Mrs de Winter's boat has been found and that there was a body in the cabin?'

	'I am afraid I don't know anything about that,' I said.

	'Don't you?' Mrs Danvers said. She stood looking at me. I turned away.

	'I will give orders about the lunch,' she said. She waited, but I did not say anything. She went out of the room.

	Mrs Danvers did not frighten me any more. She was my enemy and I did not care. But if she learnt the truth about Rebecca's death, she would become Maxim's enemy too. I suddenly felt sick and ill. I went out on to the terrace and began to walk up and down.

	At half past eleven, Maxim phoned me from Frank's office. He told me he was bringing Colonel Julyan and Frank back for lunch.

	The time dragged by. At five to one, I heard the sound of a car in the drive. Maxim came into the hall with Frank and Colonel Julyan.

	Colonel Julyan, the magistrate, was a middle-aged man with a kind face and grey hair.

	'This is most unpleasant for you and your husband,' Colonel Julyan said to me. 'I feel very sorry for both of you.'

	Maxim and Frank went on into the dining-room and Colonel Julyan continued to speak to me quietly.

	'We found a body in the boat this morning. It is the body of the late Mrs de Winter. As you know, Mr de Winter identified the other body found in the sea as his wife. That makes things rather difficult for us now.'

	The Colonel stopped suddenly as Maxim came back into the hall.

	'Lunch is ready; shall we go in?' he said.

	I did not look at Maxim during lunch. We talked about the weather and Colonel Julyan asked me about my life in France. Frith and Robert were in the room and no one wanted to talk about the boat. At last Frith served coffee and the servants left us.

	'I wish an inquest wasn't necessary,' Colonel Julyan said, 'but I'm afraid it is. I don't think it will take very long. De Winter will have to say that the body in the boat was the late Mrs de Winter. Then the boat-builder will say that the boat was in good order when he last saw it. This must be done.'

	'That's quite all right,' Maxim said. 'We understand.'

	'I suppose Mrs de Winter had to go down into the cabin for something. Then the door shut and, somehow, she was trapped there. Don't you think so, Crawley?' the Colonel asked Frank.

	'Oh yes, of course,' said Frank. I had a sudden feeling that Frank knew the truth.

	'The inquest will be on Tuesday afternoon,' Colonel Julyan told us. 'We'll keep it as short as possible, but I'm afraid the reporters will be there.'

	There was another silence.

	'Shall we go into the garden?' I said.

	We all stood on the terrace for a moment and then Colonel Julyan looked at his watch.

	'Thank you for the lunch,' he said to me. 'I'm afraid I must leave now. Would you like a lift, Crawley?'

	Maxim walked with them to the car. When they had gone, he came back to me on the terrace.

	'It's going to be all right,' Maxim said. 'There won't be any trouble at the inquest. There is nothing to show what I did. Colonel Julyan thinks she was trapped in the cabin and the jury will think that too.'

	I said nothing.

	'It's you I'm sorry for,' Maxim told me sadly. 'I don't care about anything else. I'm glad that I killed Rebecca. But I can't forget what this has done to you. You have lost that young, sweet look. And it will never come back. In twenty-four hours, you have grown so much older.'

	Frith brought in the newspapers at breakfast the following day. The story was in all of them. There was a picture of Manderley and an awful one of Maxim. All the papers said that Rebecca's body had been found after the Fancy Dress Ball. They said how everyone had loved Rebecca. They all said that Maxim had married his young, second wife within a year of Rebecca's death. It all made a good story. Maxim's face went whiter and whiter.

	I wondered what the papers would say if they knew the truth. That terrible word - murder - would be on every front page.

	Frank was a great help to us. We had no more phone calls from reporters and no visitors. It was just a question of waiting - of waiting until Tuesday.

	Maxim and I stayed quietly in the house or in the gardens. We did not walk in the woods or go down to the sea. The weather was very hot and the air was heavy. There were clouds, but the rain did not fall.



	Chapter twenty

	The Inquest

	Tuesday came at last. The inquest was at two o'clock. After an early lunch, I drove into the town with Maxim.

	'I think I shall stay here in the car,' I said. 'I won't come in with you after all.'

	'I didn't want you to come,' Maxim said. 'I wish you had stayed at Manderley.'

	Maxim went off and left me sitting there. The minutes went by. I wondered what was happening at the inquest. I got out of the car and began walking up and down.

	A policeman looked at me.

	'Excuse me, Madam,' he said. 'Aren't you Mrs de Winter? You can wait inside if you like.'

	The policeman took me into an empty room. Five minutes passed. Nothing happened. I got up and walked out of the little room. The policeman was still standing there.

	'How long will they be?' I asked him.

	'I'll go and see if you like,' the policeman said. He was back again in a moment.

	'It won't last much longer,' he told me. 'Mr de Winter has just finished giving his evidence. There's only the boat-builder, Mr Tabb, to speak now. Would you like to go in? There's an empty seat near the door.'

	I followed the policeman. He opened the door for me and I went in quietly and sat down. The room was small and full of people. The air was hot and stuffy. Frank was sitting next to Maxim. To my surprise, Mrs Danvers was there too, with Favell beside her. I wondered whether Maxim had seen him.

	Tabb, the boat-builder, standing in the centre of the room, was answering the Coroner's questions.

	'Was the boat in good condition?' the Coroner was asking.

	'Yes, it certainly was the last time I saw it,' Tabb said. 'It was a strong little boat. I can't understand why it sank that night.'

	'Accidents have happened before,' the Coroner said. 'Mrs de Winter was careless for a moment and she died.'

	'Excuse me, sir,' said the boat-builder. 'I would like to say something else.'

	'Very well, go on,' said the Coroner.

	'It's this, sir. There was nothing wrong with that boat when I last saw it. So what I want to know is this. Who made those holes in the planks? Rocks didn't do it. The boat sank too far away from them. And those holes were mad with something sharp.'

	I could not look at anyone. I stared down at the floor.

	For a moment, the Coroner was too surprised to speak. Then he said, 'What do you mean? What sort of holes?'

	'There were three of them, in different parts of the boat. And that's not all. The sea-cocks had been turned full on.'

	'The sea-cocks? What are they?' asked the Coroner.

	'The sea-cocks close the pipes leading to the wash-basins, sir. They must be kept tightly closed when the boat is sailing. Otherwise the sea water comes in.'

	It was hot in that crowded room, far too hot. I wished someone would open a window. The boat-builder was speaking again.

	'With those holes, sir, and the sea-cocks open, a small boat like Mrs de Winter's would soon sink. It's my opinion that there was no accident. That boat was sunk on purpose.'

	I must try and get out of the door, I thought. There was no air. People were standing up and talking loudly. I heard the Coroner say, 'Mr de Winter.'

	Maxim was standing up. I could not look at him.

	'Mr de Winter,' the Coroner said, 'you have heard James Tabb's evidence. Do you know anything about those holes?'

	'Nothing.'

	'Can you think why they are there?'

	'No, of course not.'

	'This news is a shock to you, of course?'

	'Of course it is a shock. Does it surprise you that I am shocked?'

	Maxim's voice was hard and angry.

	Oh God, I thought, don't let Maxim lose his temper.

	The Coroner was speaking again.

	'Mr de Winter, I want to find out exactly how your late wife died. Who looked after Mrs de Winter's boat?'

	'She looked after it herself.'

	'Then whoever took the boat out that night also made those holes and opened the sea-cocks.'

	'I suppose so.'

	'You have told us that the door and windows of the cabin were shut?'

	'Yes.'

	'Doesn't this seem very strange to you, Mr de Winter?'

	'Yes, it does.'

	'Mr de Winter, I'm afraid I must ask you one other question. Were you and the late Mrs de Winter happily married?'

	It was hot, so hot. I tried to stand up, but I could not. The ground came up to meet me. And then I heard Maxim's voice, clear and strong.

	'Will someone take my wife outside? She is going to faint.'

	I was sitting in the little room again. Frank was beside me.

	'I'm sorry,' I said. 'It was so hot in there.'

	'Are you feeling better, Mrs de Winter?' Frank asked. 'Maxim has told me to take you back to Manderley.' Frank helped me to get up.

	'I'd much rather stay,' I said. 'I want to wait for Maxim.'

	'Maxim may be some time,' Frank told me. 'They may have to go over the evidence again.'

	'But what are they trying to find out?'

	Frank did not answer. We were in his car now and he was driving very fast.

	'Did you see Favell there?' I asked. 'He was sitting with Mrs Danvers. I don't trust them, Frank. They might make trouble.'

	Frank did not answer. He could not know how much Maxim had told me. Then we were back at Manderley.

	'Will you be all right now?' Frank asked me. 'I shall go back. Maxim may want me.' He got quickly back into the car again and drove away.

	I went upstairs to my room, and lay down on my bed. What were they all saying now? What was happening? What would I do if Frank came back to Manderley without Maxim? I thought again of that dreadful word - murder. God, let me not think about it. Let me think about something else, anything...

	I must have fallen asleep. I woke up suddenly. It was five o'clock. I got up and went to the window. There was no wind. Lightning flashed against the grey sky. I heard thunder in the distance. A few drops of rain began to fall.

	I went downstairs and sat with Jasper in the library.



	Chapter twenty one

	A Visit From Jack Favell

	It was after six when I heard the sound of Maxim's car. I tried to stand up but my legs were so weak that I had to lean against a chair. Maxim came into the room and stood by the door. He looked tired and old.

	'It's all over,' he said. I waited. I could not speak or walk towards him.

	'Suicide,' Maxim said. 'That's the verdict. They said that Rebecca killed herself.'

	I sat down. 'Suicide,' I repeated. 'Why do they think Rebecca did that?'

	'God knows,' Maxim said. He went and stood by the window. 'There's one more thing to be done. Rebecca's body has to be buried. I'm going down to the church now. We'll talk about everything when I get back. We've got to start our lives all over again. The past can't hurt us if we are together. We'll have children too, I promise you. I must go now. I'm meeting Frank and Colonel Julyan at the church.' He left the room quickly and then I heard the sound of his car driving away.

	It was quiet in the library. I thought about the church where Rebecca was being buried at last.

	Just before seven, the rain began to fall heavily. I opened the windows to let in the cold, clean air. The rain was falling so heavily that I did not hear Frith come in.

	'Excuse me, Madam,' he said. 'There's a gentleman to see Mr de Winter. It's Mr Favell.'

	I was very surprised.

	'I think I had better see Mr Favell,' I said. 'Bring him in here, please, Frith.' I hoped that Favell would go before Maxim came back. I could not think why Favell had come.

	'I'm afraid Maxim is not here,' I said, when Favell walked into the room. His eyes were red. I wondered if he had been drinking.

	'I don't mind waiting,' Favell replied. 'Max will be back for dinner, I'm sure.'

	'Mr Favell,' I said. 'I don't want to be rude, but I am very tired. It will be better if you come back in the morning.'

	'No, no,' he said, coming towards me, 'I've got something to say to Max. This has been a shock to me, you know. I was very fond of Rebecca.'

	'Yes, of course,' I said. 'I'm very sorry for you.'

	'I was fonder of Rebecca than of anyone else in the world,' Favell went on. 'And she was fond of me. That's why I've come here to find out the truth. Suicide... my God. You and I know it wasn't suicide, don't we?'

	As Favell was speaking, the door opened and Maxim and Frank came in.

	'What the hell are you doing here?' Maxim said to Favell.

	'Why, hello, Max, old man,' Favell said. 'You must be feeling very pleased with yourself.'

	'Do you mind leaving the house?' said Maxim coldly. 'I don't want you here.'

	'Now, wait a minute, Max,' Favell answered. 'You've been very lucky. But I can still make life unpleasant for you. And dangerous too, perhaps.' Maxim stared hard at Favell.

	'Oh yes?' he said. 'In what way can you make things dangerous?'

	'I'll tell you, Max,' said Favell with an unpleasant smile. 'You know all about Rebecca and me. Her death was a great shock. Then I read about Rebecca's boat and the body in the cabin. So I went to the inquest. I heard the boat-builder's evidence. What about those holes in the boat, Max?'

	'You heard the verdict,' Maxim told him. 'I have nothing more to say.' Favell laughed.

	'You know Rebecca didn't kill herself. I've a note here that may interest you. I kept it because it was the last thing Rebecca ever wrote to me. Listen.'

	Favell took a piece of paper from his pocket. I recognized Rebecca's hard, black writing.

	"I tried to phone you," Favell read, "but you were out. I'm leaving London now and going back to Manderley. I'll wait for you in the cottage. Come down as soon as you can. I've got something to tell you." '

	Favell put the note back in his pocket.

	'I found that in my London flat. It was too late to drive down to Manderley. When I phoned the following day, Rebecca was dead. Do you really think Rebecca killed herself after writing that note?'

	Maxim said nothing.

	'Now, Max, old man,' Favell said at last, 'you know I'm not a rich man. If I had two or three thousand pounds, I could live quite well. I'd never come back, I promise you.'

	'I've already asked you to leave the house,' Maxim said. 'The door is behind you.'

	Favell laughed again.

	'Think again, Max,' said Favell. 'I don't suppose your new bride wants to be known as the wife of a murderer.'

	'You can't frighten me, Favell,' Maxim answered. 'Shall I phone Colonel Julyan? You can tell your story to him.'

	'You wouldn't dare, Max,' said Favell. 'I have enough evidence to hang you, Max.'

	Maxim walked slowly towards the telephone in the next room.

	'Stop him,' I said to Frank. 'Stop him for God's sake.' But it was too late. Maxim was already speaking.

	'Is that Colonel Julyan? It's de Winter here. Could you come over to Manderley at once? No - I can't say anything over the phone. Thank you very much, goodbye.'

	Maxim came back again into the room.

	'Colonel Julyan will be here in ten minutes,' he said.

	We waited in silence. The rain was so heavy that we did not hear the sound of the car. We were taken by surprise when Frith brought the magistrate into the library.

	'Good evening, Colonel Julyan,' Maxim said at once. 'This is Jack Favell, my late wife's cousin. He has something to say to you.'

	Favell went up to Colonel Julyan. 'I'm not happy about the verdict. I want you to read this note. Tell me whether you think the writer had decided to kill herself.' Colonel Julyan took the note and read it slowly.

	'I see what you mean,' he said. 'But the note is not clear. What do you think really happened to Mrs de Winter?' Favell looked at Maxim.

	'I'll tell you what I think,' he said slowly. 'Rebecca never opened those sea-cocks. She didn't make those holes in the boat. Rebecca didn't kill herself. I say she was murdered. Do you want to know who the murderer is? He's there, standing by the window. Mr Maximilian de Winter - he's your murderer. Take a good look at him.'

	Favell began to laugh, a high stupid laugh, as he twisted the note round and round in his fingers.



	Chapter twenty two

	Rebecca's Diary

	Thank God for Favell's laugh. I saw a look of disgust come into Colonel Julyan's face.

	'The man's drunk,' he said quickly. 'He doesn't know what he's saying.'

	'Drunk, am I?' shouted Favell. 'Oh no, I'm not drunk. Max de Winter murdered Rebecca, and I'm going to prove it.'

	'Wait a minute,' said Colonel Julyan. 'I want to hear your proof.'

	'Proof?' said Favell. 'Aren't those holes in the boat enough proof for you?'

	'Certainly not,' said Colonel Julyan. 'Unless you can find someone who saw him do it.'

	'I'll get your proof for you,' shouted Favell. 'De Winter killed Rebecca because of me. He was jealous because she loved me. He went down to the cottage and killed her there. Wait a minute... I think I can find someone who saw him.'

	I suddenly knew what Favell meant. Someone had seen it all happen - someone who was often down there in the bay - Ben.

	'There's an idiot who was always around the cottage,' Favell said. 'He often slept on the beach. I'm sure he saw everything.'

	'Can we get this man and question him?' asked Colonel Julyan.

	'Of course,' said Maxim. 'His name is Ben. Could you go and get him, Frank? Take your car.' Frank went out quickly. Favell laughed angrily. His face was very red. 'You all help each other down here, don't you?' he said. 'Crawley knows the truth, I'm sure. He'll be there to hold the young bride's arm when Max is sentenced to death.'

	Without warning, Maxim went up to Favell and hit him hard. Favell fell heavily to the floor. I wished that Maxim had not hit him. Favell got slowly to his feet, walked over to a small table and poured himself some whisky. I saw Colonel Julyan look thoughtfully at Maxim. Was he beginning to believe Favell's story?

	The door opened and Frank came in.

	'All right, Ben,' he said quietly. 'Don't be frightened.'

	Ben stepped into the room and stared at everyone with his small eyes. Favell walked up to him.

	'You know who I am, don't you?' he said. Ben did not answer.

	'Come on,' said Favell. 'You've seen me in the cottage, haven't you?'

	Ben held Frank's arm. 'I've never seen him,' he said. 'Is he going to take me away?'

	'No, of course not,' said Colonel Julyan. 'Now listen to me, Ben. You remember the lady with the boat. Were you on the beach when she took her boat out for the last time?'

	'You were there, weren't you?' said Favell, standing over Ben. 'You saw Mrs de Winter go into the cottage and Mr de Winter too. What happened then?'

	Ben shook his head and moved back against the wall. 'I didn't see anything,' he said. He began to cry.

	'You damned little idiot,' Favell said slowly.

	'I think Ben can go home now, don't you, Colonel Julyan?' Maxim said. Frank took Ben out of the room as the Colonel nodded his head.

	'That poor fellow was terrified,' he said. 'He's no use to you, Favell. I'm afraid you can't prove your story.'

	Favell did not answer. Instead, he rang the bell and when Frith came in, he said, 'Ask Mrs Danvers to come here, Frith.'

	'Isn't Mrs Danvers the housekeeper?' asked Colonel Julyan as Frith left the room.

	'She was also Rebecca's friend. She knew her for years,' Favell said, with his unpleasant smile.

	We all waited, watching the door. Then Mrs Danvers came in and shut the door behind her.

	'Good evening, Mrs Danvers,' Colonel Julyan said. 'I would like to ask you a question. You knew the late Mrs de Winter well. Mr Favell has told us that Mrs de Winter was in love with him. Is that true?'

	'No, it is not,' Mrs Danvers answered.

	'Now, listen, Danny,' Favell began to shout, but Mrs Danvers took no notice.

	'She was not in love with you, Mr Jack. Or with Mr de Winter. She was not in love with anyone. She thought men were fools. She amused herself with you, that was all.'

	Maxim went very white. Favell stared at Mrs Danvers as though he did not understand her.

	'Mrs Danvers,' Colonel Julyan said quietly, 'can you think of any reason why Mrs de Winter killed herself?'

	Mrs Danvers shook her head. 'No, certainly not,' she said.

	'There you are! What did I tell you?' Favell shouted.

	'Be quiet, will you. Let Mrs Danvers read the note. She may understand it,' Colonel Julyan said. Mrs Danvers took the note, read it and then shook her head again.

	'I don't know what she meant. If it was something important, she would have told me.'

	'Can you tell us how Mrs de Winter spent that last day in London? Did she keep a diary?' asked Colonel Julyan.

	'I've got her diary in my room,' Mrs Danvers replied. 'I kept all her things. I'll go and get it.'

	'Well, de Winter,' said Colonel Julyan, 'do you mind us seeing this diary?'

	'Of course not,' said Maxim. Once again, I saw Colonel Julyan give Maxim a hard look. This time Frank saw it too. Somehow I felt sure that the truth was in that diary.

	Mrs Danvers came back with a small book in her hand.

	'Here is the page for the day Mrs de Winter died,' she said. Colonel Julyan looked at it carefully.

	'Yes,' he said, 'here it is. Hairdressers at twelve o'clock. Then lunch. And then - Baker - two o'clock. Who was Baker?' He looked at Maxim. Maxim shook his head.

	'Baker?' repeated Mrs Danvers. 'She knew no one called Baker.'

	'We must find out who this person was,' said Colonel Julyan. 'If he wasn't a friend, perhaps it was someone she was afraid of.'

	'Mrs de Winter afraid?' said Mrs Danvers. 'She was afraid of nothing and no one. Only one thing worried her. That was the thought of illness, of dying slowly in her bed.'

	'What does all this matter?' said Favell. 'If Baker was important Danny would know about him.' Mrs Danvers was turning the pages of the diary.

	'There's a telephone number here at the back,' she said. 'And the name Baker again.'

	'Well,' said Maxim, lighting a cigarette. 'Perhaps someone should phone that number. Would you mind, Frank?'

	Frank took the diary without a word and went into the next room. He shut the door behind him. When he came back, he said, 'That was a doctor's number. Dr Baker used to live there, but he left six months ago. They gave me his new address. I have written it here.' And Frank held out a piece of paper.

	It was then that Maxim looked at me. He looked at me like a man saying goodbye for the last time. That piece of paper was enough to hang Maxim.

	I knew why Rebecca had gone to a doctor. I knew what she had wanted to tell Favell. Rebecca had been pregnant when she died. She had been going to have a child. It was the one clear proof that Rebecca had not killed herself.

	I was sure that this was the truth. I knew Maxim thought so too.

	'Well done, Frank,' said Maxim calmly. 'Where does the doctor live now?'

	'In north London,' Frank replied. 'But he's not on the phone. He's a very well-known women's doctor.'

	'Well,' said Colonel Julyan. 'There must have been something wrong with her after all.'

	'I'll write him a letter,' Frank said.

	'I don't think he would tell you anything,' Colonel Julyan answered. 'I think de Winter should see him and explain.'

	'I'm ready to go,' said Maxim quietly. 'Shall I go up in the morning?'

	'He's not going alone,' Favell said with a laugh. 'You go with him, Julyan. And I think I'd better go too. What time do we start?'

	Colonel Julyan looked at Maxim.

	'Nine o'clock?' he said. 'Perhaps you will take me in your car.'

	'We'll meet at the crossroads just after nine,' Favell said. He walked to the door.

	'I suppose you're not going to ask me to dinner, so I'll say goodbye. Come on, Danny. I'll see you in the morning, Max.'

	Colonel Julyan came up to me and took my hand.

	'Good night,' he said. 'Get your husband to bed early. Tomorrow will be a long day.' He held my hand for a moment, but he did not look into my eyes. He and Frank went out together. Maxim and I were alone at last.

	'I'm coming with you tomorrow,' I said.

	'Yes,' Maxim answered. 'We must be together as long as we can.'

	I put my arms around him and held him. We did not say anything. Then Maxim held me tightly. We began to kiss each other, like guilty lovers who had never kissed before.



	Chapter twenty three

	Dr Baker

	I woke up early the following morning at about six o'clock. I got up and went to the window. The trees were covered in mist.

	There was a sharp coolness in the air. Autumn had arrived.

	This was the start of a new day at Manderley. Soon the servants would be starting work. Whatever happened to us, life at Manderley would go on. The peace of Manderley could not be broken. Its beauty could not be destroyed. The flowers would come every year, the birds would sing. Manderley would always be here, safe and secure, within sound of the sea.

	Maxim slept on and I did not wake him. The day ahead would be long and tiring. London was many miles away. We did not know what we should find at the end of the journey.

	Somewhere in London lived a man called Baker. He had never heard of us. But our future was in his hands.

	I had a bath, dressed and then woke Maxim. He got up and went into the bathroom. I began to pack a few things. We might have to stay overnight in London. I looked at my small case. It seemed so long since I had used it. But it was only four months. I could not believe it.

	We had breakfast together and I went out on to the terrace. The air was fresh and clear now. It was going to be a perfect day. At nine o'clock exactly, Frank brought up Colonel Julyan in his car.

	We were going in Maxim's car. I sat beside Maxim and Colonel Julyan got into the back.

	'You will telephone, won't you?' Frank said as he stood on the steps.

	'Yes, of course,' Maxim said. As we drove away, I looked back at the house. It had never looked more beautiful. For some reason, my eyes filled with tears. Then we were round the bend of the drive and I could see the house no longer.

	When we came to the crossroads, Favell was already waiting. He waved when he saw us and started up his car. I settled down for the long journey to London. The hours passed and the miles went by, Favell's car always behind us.

	We had lunch somewhere and reached London at about three o'clock. It was then that I began to feel tired. It was warm and the streets were busy. The drive through the centre of London seemed very long. Maxim looked pale and tired, but he did not say anything. Favell's car was always behind us.

	We reached Baker's house at about five o'clock. Maxim stopped the car and we got out. Favell came up to meet us. We all walked slowly up the path to the front door. Colonel Julyan rang the bell.

	A woman opened the door.

	'Is Dr Baker at home?' said Colonel Julyan. 'He is expecting us. I sent a telegram.'

	'Yes, of course,' said the woman. 'My husband is in the garden. I'll tell him you are here.'

	She took us into a cool room at the back of the house. She went out and in a few minutes a tall man came into the room.

	'I'm Dr Baker. I'm sorry to keep you waiting. Please sit down,' he said.

	'We are sorry to trouble you, Dr Baker,' Colonel Julyan said. 'My name is Julyan. This is Mr de Winter, Mrs de Winter and Mr Favell. We have come about the death of the late Mrs de Winter. You may have read the report in the papers.'

	'The verdict was suicide,' Favell said. 'I knew Mrs de Winter very well. She did not kill herself. She had no reason to. We want to know why she came to see you on the day she died.'

	Dr Baker looked surprised. 'I think you've made a mistake,' he said. 'No one called de Winter has ever come to me.'

	'But we found your old telephone number in Mrs de Winter's diary.' Dr Baker looked at the page from the diary that Colonel Julyan was holding out to him.

	'That certainly was my number,' he said.

	'Perhaps Mrs de Winter gave you a different name,' Colonel Julyan suggested.

	'It's possible,' said Dr Baker slowly.

	'If you have any record of a visit on that day, could we see it?' Colonel Julyan asked. 'This is an important matter.'

	'Murder,' Favell said.

	'Of course,' said the doctor. 'I had no idea there was any question of that. I'll go and get my book.'

	While Dr Baker was out of the room, we said nothing. No one looked at anyone else. Favell whistled quietly under his breath.

	Dr Baker came back into the room with a large book. He opened the book and turned the pages. We all stood watching his face.

	'I saw a Mrs Danvers on the 12th at two o'clock,' Dr Baker said at last.

	'Danny? Why did...?' Favell began. Maxim broke in.

	'Rebecca gave the wrong name, of course,' he said. 'Do you remember the visit now, Doctor?' But Dr Baker was already searching his files. He picked out a card and read it.

	'Yes,' he said slowly, 'I remember now.'

	'Was she tall and dark, a beautiful woman?' Colonel Julyan asked.

	'Yes,' said Dr Baker. He put back the card and looked at Maxim. The doctor spoke slowly.

	'The woman who called herself Mrs Danvers was very ill indeed. She had come to me the week before. I took some X-rays. She had come back to hear the result. I remember her words exactly. "I want to know the truth," she said. "If I'm really ill, I want to know." So I told her.'

	Dr Baker stopped and looked down at the files.

	'There was nothing to be done,' he went on. 'An operation would have been useless. I told her that. In six months, she would have been dead.'

	No one said a word and the doctor went on, 'Mrs de Winter looked a healthy woman. She had very little pain at that time. But the pain would have come. The X-rays showed that she could never have had a child. But that was nothing to do with her illness.'

	Everyone was standing up. We shook hands with Dr Baker and he walked with us to the front door.

	'Shall I send you my report?' Dr Baker asked.

	'We may not need it,' said Colonel Julyan. 'We'll write to you if we do. Thank you very much.'

	'I am glad to have been of some use,' said Dr Baker. 'Goodbye.' And he shut the door.



	Chapter twenty four

	The Return to Manderley

	We went and stood by the car. No one said anything for a few minutes. Favell's face was grey. His hand shook as he lit a cigarette.

	'She kept it a secret from everyone, even Danny. It's been a dreadful shock to me,' Favell said. 'You're all right, of course, Max. You've been lucky, haven't you? You and your young wife can go back to Manderley now. You think you've won, but don't be too sure, I haven't finished with you yet.'

	'Shall we get into the car and go?' Colonel Julyan asked Maxim. Favell smiled unpleasantly. As we drove away, he was still standing there, watching us.

	'Favell can't do anything,' Colonel Julyan told us. 'I'll soon deal with him if he comes near Manderley again. I don't think the papers will bother you any more. There may be some talk, but I'll make sure that people hear about Dr Baker.'

	'Thank you very much,' Maxim said.

	'What a dreadful thing illness is,' Colonel Julyan went on. 'I suppose she could not face the pain. She was such a lovely young woman, too.' Neither of us answered him.

	Colonel Julyan's sister lived in London and he asked Maxim to take him to her house.

	'We must thank you for all your help,' Maxim said as the magistrate got out of the car.

	'I've been glad to help. You must forget it all now. Why don't you have a holiday, go abroad perhaps. Goodbye, both of you. It's been a long day.'

	As Maxim started up the car, I leant back in my seat and closed my eyes. We drove on through the traffic and I felt full of peace. Nothing could hurt us any more.

	We had dinner in a restaurant and Maxim phoned Frank.

	'Do you think Colonel Julyan knows the truth about Rebecca's death?' I asked Maxim as we were drinking our coffee.

	'Of course he knows,' Maxim said. 'But he will never say anything. I believe that Rebecca lied to me on purpose. She wanted me to kill her. That's why she laughed. She was laughing when she died.'

	I did not say anything. It was all over. There was no need for Maxim to look so white and troubled.

	'I'm not sure that Rebecca hasn't won, even now,' Maxim went on. 'Frank told me something rather strange on the phone. Mrs Danvers has left Manderley. There was a long-distance call for her at six. By a quarter to seven, she had gone.'

	'Isn't that a good thing?' I said. 'Favell phoned her, of course. But they can't do anything to us.'

	I was glad that Mrs Danvers had gone. Manderley could be ours. We would have people to stay. And soon, very soon Maxim and I would have children.

	'Have you finished your coffee?' Maxim said to me suddenly. 'I feel that we must get back to Manderley as soon as possible. Something's wrong, I know it is.'

	'But you'll be so tired,' I said.

	'No, I shall be all right. We can be at Manderley by two o'clock.'

	We went out to the car and Maxim covered me with a rug. It was dark now and I fell asleep almost at once. I started to dream. I saw the staircase at Manderley and Mrs Danvers standing there in her long, black dress. Then, in my dream, I was alone in the woods near Manderley. I wanted to get to the Happy Valley, but I could not find it. The dark trees were all round me. Then I was standing on the terrace. Moonlight shone on the windows. The gardens had gone and the dark woods came up to the walls of the house.

	I woke up suddenly.

	'You've slept for two hours,' Maxim told me. 'It's quarter past two. We shall be home by three.'

	The early morning was very cold. The sky was dark now and there were no stars.

	'What time did you say it was?' I said suddenly.

	'It's twenty past two,' Maxim replied.

	'That's strange,' I said. 'The dawn seems to be coming up over there, behind those hills. But it can't be, it's too early.'

	'It's the wrong direction, too,' Maxim said 'you're looking west.'

	I went on watching the sky. It was still getting lighter. A blood-red light was spreading across the sky. Maxim began to drive faster, much faster.

	'That's not the dawn,' he said, 'that's Manderley.'

	We reached the top of the hill. The road to Manderley lay before us. There was no moon and the sky above our heads was black. But the sky in front of us was full of dreadful light. And the light was red, red like blood. The wind blew towards us from the sea. The wind smelt of smoke and it was grey with ashes. They were the ashes of Manderley.





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	CHAPTER one

	Monkey's Story

	Monkey pulled out some hairs from his chest and, crying 'Change!' threw them into the air. At once, they became several hundred small monkeys.

	From the beginning of time, the rock was smoothed and cleaned by Heaven and Earth, by the strong sun and the gentle moon, until one day it broke into two pieces and gave birth to a stone egg, about as big as a child's ball. From the egg came a stone monkey.

	At once, this monkey learned to climb and run. But first, it looked north and south and east and west. As it looked, a strange light came from its eyes.

	The light shone as far as the Jade Emperor, who sat in the Cloud Palace of the Golden Gates. The Jade Emperor asked his ministers to open the gate of the Southern Heaven and look out at the light.

	'This light,' reported the ministers, 'comes from the small country of Ao-lai, to the east of the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit.'

	And in the country of Ao-lai, the monkey ran and jumped. He picked flowers, ate grass and fruit, and drank from streams and rivers. His friends were all the animals of that country, and the other monkeys were his family. At night, he slept among the rocks and in the day he walked through the caves.

	One day, the monkeys were washing in a stream when one of them spoke. 'None of us knows where this stream comes from. Let's follow it and find out.'

	So they all ran up the stream until they came to a great waterfall.

	The monkeys shouted, 'Lovely water, lovely water! It starts in a mountain cave and runs all the way to the Great Sea. Who can find the place where the water comes from? If one of us could find this place and return safely, we would make him our king!'

	'I will go!' shouted the Stone Monkey. 'I will go!'

	Look at him! He shuts his eyes, and with one big jump he passes through the curtain of water. But there is no water where he has landed. Instead he finds a great, shining iron bridge in front of him.

	Monkey walked along the bridge and came to a cave. Outside the cave there was a sign: This Cave of the Water Curtain in the Country of the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit Leads to Heaven.

	Monkey laughed and jumped with happiness. He ran back across the bridge, shut his eyes and jumped through the waterfall to the other monkeys.

	'Good news!' he shouted. 'Good news! Come with me, all of you!'

	They followed the Stone Monkey to the Cave of the Water Curtain. There the Stone Monkey sat down and talked to them.

	'Gentlemen!' he said. 'I have been through the waterfall and have come back again. I have given you a home in this cave, so am I not your king now?'

	The monkeys bowed to the Stone Monkey and they all cried, 'Great King for a thousand years!' The Stone Monkey became the Monkey King and he made other monkeys his ministers.

	And all the monkeys were happy. During the day they walked and played on the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit, and at night they slept in the Cave of the Water Curtain. They had everything they wanted. Their lives were complete.

	The Monkey King enjoyed this simple life for several hundred years. But one day at a great party with all the other monkeys, he suddenly started to cry.

	The other monkeys all bowed, saying, 'Why is our king so sad?'

	'Today,' said the Monkey King, 'I am not sad. But I am worried about the future. Sadly, the time will come when I will become old and weak. Yama, King of Death, is waiting to destroy me. I do not want to be born again on Earth. How can I live for all time among the people of the sky?'

	The monkeys all started to cry, each thinking of his own mortality. One of them said, 'Only Buddhas and Immortals do not go to Yama, King of Death. Only they live forever.'

	'Where can I find these Immortals?' asked the Monkey King.

	'Here on Earth they live in very old caves far to the West.'

	'Tomorrow,' said the Monkey King, 'I shall say goodbye to you. I shall go down the mountain and travel to the end of the world. I want to learn to live for all time and to escape from death.'

	Next morning, he walked to the sea and sailed in a boat to the borders of the Southern World. There he climbed out on to the beach. And then he walked and walked, through towns and cities, to the West.

	On the way, he learned to wear clothes and to behave like a human. But he met humans who wanted only to be rich and famous. He met nobody who worried about his mortality.

	One day, he came to the Western Ocean, where he built another boat. Then he sailed to the Western Continent, where he saw a very high and beautiful wooded mountain. At the top of the mountain was the Cave of the Moon and Three Stars, where the Immortal Subodhi lived.

	Monkey at once bowed and touched the ground with his head three times.

	'Where do you come from?' asked the Immortal.

	'I am from the Cave of the Water Curtain,' said Monkey, 'on the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit in the country of Ao-lai.'

	'That is impossible!' shouted the Immortal. 'Between there and here are two oceans and the whole of the Southern Continent. You are lying!'

	'I have sailed across the oceans and walked over the continents for more than ten years,' said Monkey. 'At last I have reached here.'

	Monkey told the Immortal how he had come from a magic stone. The Immortal thought that Monkey was a natural product of Heaven and Earth, so he agreed to teach him. Monkey jumped up and down with happiness.

	Day after day, he and the other students learned to speak and behave correctly. They learned to write well and to study the Scriptures. When they were not studying, the students grew flowers and trees. They lit fires and fetched water. And so Monkey lived in this way for six or seven years.

	Finally, the Immortal sent for Monkey late one night because he wanted to teach him the Way of Long Life.

	'Come close and listen carefully,' said the Immortal.

	Monkey went down on his knees on the floor at the Immortal's feet, listening carefully. The Immortal recited a magic poem with many lines. The words shook Monkey's soul and he was never the same Monkey again. He thanked the Immortal many times, because now he knew the Way of Long Life.

	Time passed quickly and three years later the Immortal again invited Monkey to his room, where he taught him seventy-two transformations. Monkey was a quick learner and he practised until he could change himself into something else, using all seventy-two ways.

	One day, when the Immortal and his students were in front of the cave admiring the evening view, the Immortal spoke to Monkey. 'Monkey, how much have you learned?'

	'Thanks to you,' said Monkey, 'I have learned a lot. In addition to changing myself into other forms, I can already fly.'

	'Let me see you do it,' said the Immortal.

	Monkey put his feet together, jumped twenty metres into the air and rode the clouds for a few minutes. Then he dropped to the ground, saying, 'You see, I can ride the clouds.'

	'That is not riding the clouds,' said the Immortal, laughing. 'A real cloud-rider can start in the morning from the Northern Sea, cross the Eastern, the Western and the Southern Seas and land again in one day.'

	'It sounds very difficult,' said Monkey.

	'Nothing in the world is difficult,' said the Immortal. 'Only our own thoughts make things seem difficult. Now I will teach you to fly from one continent to another.'

	The other students laughed, saying, 'If Monkey flies all that way, he will be able to earn a living as a postman.'

	But Monkey spent all night practising what the Immortal had taught him.

	By morning he could fly wherever he wanted.

	One summer day, some students were sitting under a tree. A student said, 'Monkey, why do you deserve private teaching by the Immortal? Has he taught you the transformations, by all the seventy-two ways?'

	'I have been working on them day and night and now I can do them all,' said Monkey.

	'Could you show us?'

	Proudly, Monkey made a magic sign, said some magic words and transformed himself into a tree.

	'Well done, Monkey, well done!' shouted the other students. They all laughed.

	The Immortal heard their laughter and he came running out from the cave.

	'Who is making all this noise?' he asked.

	Monkey changed himself back from a tree to a monkey. He sat with the students again and said, 'Immortal, we are practising our lessons out here.'

	'You were all shouting and laughing!' said the Immortal, angrily. 'I want to know why.'

	Then one student said, 'Monkey was transforming himself into a tree, just for fun.'

	'You, Monkey, come here!' shouted the Immortal. 'Why do you think I taught you these secrets of life? So you can make other people laugh?'

	'I am very sorry,' said Monkey.

	'I will not punish you,' said the Immortal. 'But you cannot stay here. You must leave us.'

	Monkey started to cry. 'Where can I go?' he asked.

	'Go back to where you came from. Go as quickly as you can. Never tell anyone that you were a student of mine. I am sure that no good will come of your life.'

	And so poor Monkey said goodbye to everybody. He flew back to the Eastern Sea and his home in the Cave of the Water Curtain on the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit.

	'Little ones,' shouted the Monkey King, 'I have come back!'

	At once, big and small monkeys leapt out of trees with cries of 'Long live our King!' Then, pushing each other to get near him, they cried, 'Why did you go for so long? We have been watching for your return day after day! While you were away, a demon took our cave and everything we own and many of our children. Now we dare not sleep, night or day.'

	'What demon dares to do this?' cried Monkey. 'I will make him pay!'

	'King, he is called the Destroying Demon, and he lives north of here. But he comes and goes like a cloud, like wind, like rain, like thunder and lightning, so we do not know where his home is or how far away.'

	'Well, don't worry,' said Monkey. 'I will go and look for him.'

	Dear Monkey! He leapt into the sky and soon saw in front of him a high mountain and a cave, where the Destroying Demon was waiting for him.

	'Where is the owner of the Cave of the Water Curtain?' cried the Demon.

	'You have such large eyes,' shouted Monkey, 'but you cannot see Monkey?'

	'Oh! You are not half a metre high! If I killed such a small creature with my sword, I would look foolish.'

	So the two of them fought with their hands and feet, hitting and kicking each other. Soon the Demon was fighting like a wild animal. Monkey pulled out some hairs from his chest and, crying 'Change!' threw them into the air. At once, they became several hundred small monkeys.

	See how the monkeys jump on the Demon, pulling and hitting him. Then Monkey takes up the Demon's great sword and brings it down on his head, breaking it in two. Then, by his magic, he transforms all the monkeys back into hairs.

	When Monkey returned home to the cave on the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit, he brought the great sword of the Destroying Demon, and he amused the other monkeys by teaching them to make weapons of wood.

	Then, one day, the Monkey King called all the other monkeys to him.

	'All this,' he said, pointing to their wooden weapons, 'is only a game. We cannot defend ourselves from a real enemy with these.'

	'We know a city that is full of soldiers. They must have plenty of weapons,' the others said. They quickly told Monkey where it was.

	'Stay here and amuse yourselves,' Monkey said. 'I will see what I can do.' Dear Monkey! Using his magic, he flew to the city and, with his breath, blew such a strong wind that all the people locked themselves indoors. This was his chance. He found where the weapons were kept, kicked down the door, and changed his hairs into thousands of small monkeys who took the weapons. Carried on a magic wind, they were soon back at the cave.

	The monkeys learned to use the weapons, and all sorts of wild animals and demon kings began to call Monkey their king.

	But Monkey found his own weapon too heavy, so he went to the Dragon of the Eastern Sea in search of something lighter. The Dragon King welcomed him to the palace, with his dragon children, dragon grandchildren and fish soldiers.

	Monkey made his request, and a fish soldier brought out a great sword.

	'Too heavy,' said Monkey.

	More fish soldiers brought out an enormous fork.

	'Too light,' said Monkey.

	The dragon mother and her daughter came from a back room in the palace and suggested their magic iron cudgel.

	'The Gods used it when they decided how deep the rivers and the seas should be,' said the Dragon King. He agreed that Monkey should have it.

	When it was brought, Monkey saw that it was a thick piece of iron six metres long. He used his magic to bring it down to less than a metre. Then he waved it over his head, striking terror into everybody in the room.

	But now he demanded something to wear, to go with the weapon, and this was too much. A pair of cloud-stepping shoes, a cap of red gold and a coat of light metal were brought to him, but the angry Dragon King also sent for his brothers from the Southern, Northern and Western Seas and told them about Monkey's many requests.

	The Dragon of the South was angry. 'Put him in prison!' he cried.

	'No, no,' warned the Dragon King. 'We cannot go near him now. If he touches us with that iron cudgel, he will kill us. Let him keep the clothes. We will complain to Heaven, and Heaven will punish him.'

	Monkey took the clothes, but he knew that they were going to complain about him.

	Soon after that, the Jade Emperor received the complaint from the Dragon of the Eastern Sea.

	'How long,' the Jade Emperor asked his ministers, 'has this Monkey existed, and why does he behave like an Immortal?'

	'In the last three hundred years, he has learned a lot,' said a minister. 'Let's give him work here in Heaven where we will be able to watch hint.'

	This suggestion pleased the Jade Emperor, and a minister was sent to bring Monkey to Heaven. Monkey tidied his clothes, told the older monkeys to look after the younger ones, and followed the minister to Heaven.

	'I am going to give you a job,' said the Jade Emperor to Monkey. 'You are going to look after the Apple Garden.'

	Monkey was very happy and ran to the Apple Garden to start work. He was told that on the outer side of the garden were special apples. They were ready to eat once in three thousand years. If you ate one of these, you would become wise, with strong arms and legs and a light body. In the middle were trees with apples that were ready to eat once in six thousand years. If you ate these, you would go up in the air and stay there, and would never grow old. At the back were trees with apples chat were ready to eat once in nine thousand years. If you ate these, you would live longer than Heaven and Earth.

	Monkey was very happy with this information. He watched the trees closely, making up his mind to eat the fruit before anybody else got a chance.

	Soon, noticing that some apples were ready to eat, he sent his helpers away.

	He climbed into a high tree and ate until he could eat no more.

	When the Queen of Heaven sent her lady assistants for apples, they were turned away at the gates by Monkey's helpers. 'We must ask the Monkey King first,' they said. 'He is resting in one of the trees.'

	But when they came to the tree, they found only Monkey's cap and shoes. They could not see him. In fact, Monkey had made himself five centimetres long and was asleep under a leaf.

	The Queen of Heaven's lady assistants picked three basketfuls from each of the first two groups of trees. When they came to the third, they found just one apple. When one of the ladies tried to pick it, Monkey woke up. At once, he changed back to his true size.

	'Who are you?' shouted Monkey.

	The lady assistants went down on their knees. 'Monkey King, don't be angry. We were sent by the Queen and we could not find you. Please forgive us.'

	'Get up from your knees,' said Monkey, his voice full of kindness. 'I have heard that the Queen of Heaven is having a banquet. Can you tell me who is invited?'

	Monkey was told that all the Immortals, Emperors of the Four Quarters and Gods of the seas and hills would be there. He immediately asked, 'Will I be invited?'

	'I have not heard,' said one of the lady assistants. 'We do not know.'

	'Quite right, ladies,' said Monkey. 'Just wait here while I go and see.'

	Dear Monkey! He recited some magic lines, crying 'Stay, stay, stay!' The lady assistants were suddenly unable to move while he went off on his magic cloud.

	No one had arrived at the banquet yet, but Monkey could smell the food and wine. He sent the servants to sleep by magic. Look at them, how their hands fall to their sides, their heads drop on to their chests, their eyes close! Monkey then took some of the finest and best of the food and drank glass after glass of wine until he was quite drunk.

	'Bad! Bad!' he thought to himself. 'I will certainly get into trouble, so I will go home and sleep.'

	But it was too late for that.

	Back at the Apple Garden, the Queen's ladies were finally saved. They reported that the Monkey King had eaten many of the biggest apples and had now disappeared.

	When the great Goddess Kuan-yin arrived for the banquet, she found half the food eaten and all the wine gone. When the servants were woken, they explained that the Monkey King had sent them to sleep. That was the last time they had seen the food and the wine. The Jade Emperor was informed and he sent heavenly soldiers to find Monkey.

	Monkey was burned in fire for nine days, and at the end of it his eyes were red but he was still alive. He was attacked with swords and the Gods of Thunder threw thunder at him. But nothing could destroy him.

	In the end, hearing of this situation, the great Buddha himself arrived and called Monkey to him. 'How long ago,' he asked him, 'did you try to become an Immortal and learn the things that make you dare behave like this?'

	Monkey at once recited:

	Born of Earth and Sky, I am a magic Immortal.

	I am an old monkey from the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit;

	In the Cave of the Water Curtain, I work and laugh and play.

	I found a friend and teacher who taught me the Great Secret;

	I made myself perfect in the Ways of Immortality,

	I learned transformations without limit or end,

	I tired of the narrow world of men, and lived in the Jade Heaven.

	But why should Heaven's palace have only one emperor?

	On Earth king follows king, as the strong bow to the stronger.

	Only a hero fights with the Gods of Gods.

	That was what Monkey recited. Buddha laughed. 'But you are only a monkey-spirit,' he said. 'The Jade Emperor has been making himself perfect for countless years. How can you hope to take his place and become emperor yourself? You are only an animal that looks half human! Talk no more of this.'

	'Why should he be emperor for all time? Tell him to go and to give me my chance,' said Monkey. 'That is all I ask. And if he will not, I will see that he never has any peace.'

	'What magic have you got that would help you to take Heaven for yourself?'

	'I have a lot of magic,' replied Monkey. 'I can jump through the clouds from continent to continent. Am I not good enough to live in the palaces of Heaven?' Buddha said, 'If you are really so clever, you will sit here in my right hand and then jump off. If you succeed, you can become the Jade Emperor. But if you fail, you will go back to Earth and you will be punished for centuries.'

	Monkey thought, 'This Buddha is a complete fool. How could I fail to jump off his hand!'

	Buddha held out his hand, which looked about the size of a large leaf. Monkey took the magic iron cudgel that the Dragon King had given him, and that he had transformed into a stick the size of a needle. He put it behind his ear and then he jumped from the hand as far and as fast as he could.

	He was flying very fast, but Buddha watched him with the eye of wisdom. Monkey came at last to five high pink towers.

	'This must be the end of the world,' said Monkey to himself. 'Now I will return to Buddha, become emperor, and all Heaven will be mine. But I had better leave some sign that I was here.'

	Pulling out a hair, he changed it into a writing-brush heavy with ink, and at the bottom of the middle tower he wrote: The great Monkey King reached this place. Then he jumped back to where he had come from.

	Standing on Buddha's hand, he said, 'I have gone and I have returned. You can tell the Jade Emperor that his job is mine.'

	'You smelly creature,' said Buddha, 'you have been on my hand all the time.'

	'You are completely wrong,' said Monkey. 'I travelled to the end of the world, saw five pink towers and wrote on one of them. Would you like me to take you and show you?'

	'No need,' said Buddha. 'Just look down.'

	Monkey looked down, with his eyes still red from the nine days of fire.

	There, at the bottom of the middle finger of Buddha's hand, he saw the words "The great Monkey King reached this place."

	Monkey could not speak and his red eyes opened wide in surprise. At last he said, 'Impossible! Impossible! I wrote that on a tower going high into the sky. How did it get on the Buddha's finger? It is magic! I shall go back to look!'

	Dear Monkey! He was preparing to jump again when Buddha pushed him out of the Western Gate of Heaven. As he did, he changed his five fingers into Metal, Wood, Water, Fire and Earth. They became a mountain which pressed poor Monkey down with its great weight.

	The name Mountain of Metal, Wood, Water, Fire and Earth was written on a large rock on the mountain. Under the mountain there was enough air for Monkey to breathe, but no opening which Monkey's head or hand could squeeze through.

	Buddha then told a spirit to look after Monkey and give him food and drink.

	'And when the days of his punishment are finished,' said Buddha, 'a man will come here and save him.'

	Time passed, and then one day the Buddha said to his followers, 'I have noticed a lot of difference between the people who live in the four continents of the world. The people in the East are polite, peaceful and cheerful. People in the North are lazy and stupid, so do little harm. In our Western Continent, there is no killing, although there is little real wisdom. But in the South, they are greedy and murderous. A knowledge of the True Scriptures might improve them.'

	'Do you have these Scriptures?' asked his followers.

	'Yes, three baskets of them,' said Buddha. 'One speaks of Heaven, another of Earth, and a third can save people from the Wrong Way. These are the path to perfection, the only gate to the True Way. But down in the real world, people are so stupid that they laugh at them. I need to find someone who will go to the Eastern land. There he might find a believer who could come here from China.

	I would give this believer the Scriptures to take back to China and change the hearts of the people.'

	The Goddess Kuan-yin came forward and bowed three times.

	'I would like to go to the Eastern land and find someone to fetch the Scriptures.'

	'Who would be better than you!' said Buddha.

	So Kuan-yin called her bodyguard, Hui-yen, who carried a great iron cudgel, and they started at once.

	After they had travelled a long way, they came to the River of Sands. There, a horribly ugly creature leapt out of the water and began a terrible fight with the bodyguard.

	Suddenly, the creature stopped fighting, looked hard at the bodyguard and asked, 'Who dares to fight with me? Surely I have seen you before in the gardens of the Goddess Kuan-yin?'

	'The Goddess herself is here, in front of you,' Hui-yen replied.

	'I ask you to forgive me!' cried the creature. 'I am not really the ugly creature that you see. I was given this horrible shape as a punishment for a crime that I did in Heaven. I was sent to the world below, where I am always hungry and I must attack travellers and eat them.'

	'But you are adding new crimes on Earth to your crime in Heaven by killing people,' said the Goddess Kuan-yin.

	'Why not come with us? If our journey is successful, you will be forgiven and allowed to return to Heaven.'

	'I would gladly go back,' the creature answered. 'But I have eaten so many humans. Even now, nine heads are lying on the waters of the River of Sands. I have played games with them and I do not think I will be allowed back into Heaven after that.'

	'Don't be silly,' she replied. 'Take the heads and hang them round your neck.

	I shall make you a priest and give you the name "Sandy Priest".

	Wait here and never again take a human life. You will see that a man will come this way. He will be looking for the Scriptures and a good use will be found for the nine heads.'

	So the Goddess and her bodyguard continued their journey and came to a high mountain with a most horrible smell. A dirty, smelly, piglike creature leapt out and attacked Kuan-yin with a great fork and fought hard with her bodyguard.

	For safety, Kuan-yin stood in the sky above them and then threw down flowers, which fell between the bodyguard's cudgel and the fork.

	'Fighting with flowers?' cried the pig. 'What kind of priest are you?'

	'The great Goddess Kuan-yin threw them down on us from her cloud, where she is standing,' replied the bodyguard.

	At once, the pig bowed to the sky. 'Forgive me, Goddess, forgive me! I am not really a pig at all. For a crime in Heaven, the Jade Emperor sent me down here.'

	'This is a chance for you,' said Kuan-yin. 'We are on our way to China to look for a man who will collect the Scriptures. If you went with him to India, we would forgive all your crimes.'

	'I will! I will!' the pig-like creature shouted.

	So they gave him the name of Pigsy, and left him to watch for the pilgrim who would collect the Scriptures.

	The Goddess and her bodyguard went on their way and soon they met a dragon who had fought against the Gods.

	'Can you help me?' the dragon cried out.

	Kuan-yin went back to Heaven. She asked the Gods to forgive the dragon if he would transform himself into a white horse and carry the pilgrim to India.

	Continuing their journey, the Goddess and her bodyguard suddenly saw a mountain covered in magic fog and lit by golden light from Heaven. They recognised it at once as the mountain which covered the Monkey King.

	Kuan-yin looked sad and recited:

	Long ago he was purposelessly brave.

	In his blackness of heart he spoiled the Heavenly Apple Banquet

	And tried to take the place of the Jade Emperor.

	Will he ever again be free and win back his name?

	Then came a voice from inside the mountain: 'Who is reciting a list of my crimes?'

	Kuan-yin found the spirit who looked after Monkey. This spirit led her to Monkey's prison under the mountain, which was a kind of stone box.

	Monkey looked out through a thin opening with his red eyes and cried, 'You are the Goddess Kuan-yin! Why have you come here? Buddha tricked me and I have sat in this little box for five hundred years. But I am very sorry for the things I have done and now I want to do good in the world.'

	Kuan-yin was very happy. 'Just wait quietly here until I return with my pilgrim and he will save you,' she said.

	And so they left Monkey and went on to the East, to find the pilgrim.



	CHAPTER two

	The Journey Begins

	'I can tell you that I have killed quite a lot of people. And I am still the great Monkey King!' answered Monkey.

	At a time when the great and very old city of Ch'ang-an was the capital of China, there was an examination to find the cleverest men in the country. These men would do the work of the government.

	A man by the name of Ch'en O decided to try his luck at the examination, as it was his mother's wish. Arriving late, he found that the examination had begun. But to his surprise, he won first place and he received a letter signed by the Emperor.

	In those days, the winner of first place in the examination was led through the streets on horseback. And by chance, on that day, the only daughter of a minister sat in her high tower with a ball in her hand. Seeing the handsome Ch'en riding by, and knowing of his success in the examination, she threw the ball cleverly on to his hat. This was how a lady chose her husband.

	No time was wasted. Ch'en and the minister's daughter were married, and hand in hand they went into the bedroom as man and wife. Early next morning, Ch'en was made Governor of Chiang-chou and, as he was told to begin work at once, he started on the journey with his wife.

	It was late spring. There was a gentle wind in the trees and a light rain fell. The road to Chiang-chou took Ch'en and his wife close to his home, so they stopped at his mother's house. Ch'en said to his mother, 'You wanted me to take the examination, and look at all the good luck that has come from it. I would like to thank you and to ask you to come with us.'

	His mother happily agreed and after travelling for some days, the three arrived at the Hotel of Ten Thousand Flowers. But here the mother suddenly became ill and asked to rest.

	Next day, a man arrived with a gold-coloured fish for sale and young Ch'en bought it for his mother. Suddenly, he noticed that the fish's eyes were strange. 'This is not an ordinary creature,' he said. He asked where it was caught and then returned it to the river in the same place.

	'You were right to put the fish back in the river,' said his mother when he told her about the fish's eyes. Then she said, 'Leave me here with some of the luggage and I shall follow when the days are cooler.'

	When Ch'en, his wife and servants arrived at the same river, they were met by two boatmen who Ch'en had harmed in an earlier life. They stared at his young wife, who was very beautiful. Then they took the boat to a lonely placeand killed first the servants and then Ch'en himself. The young woman tried to throw herself into the river, but they stopped her.

	One of the murderers, whose name was Liu, put on the Governor's clothes, took the official papers and left for Chiang-chou with Mrs Ch'en.

	Liu left the boat with the other boatman, Li, who threw the bodies into the river. The bodies of the servants could be seen on the river, but Ch'en's body went straight to the bottom. A servant of the Dragon King saw it there and went to the palace to tell the Dragon King himself. The Dragon King asked to see it.

	When Ch'en's body was brought to him, he recognised this man. In the body of a gold-coloured fish, the Dragon King had been saved by him only a few days before. In return for Ch'en's kindness, the Dragon King sent his servant to the place where the souls of the newly dead go. The servant returned with Ch'en's soul and Ch'en woke from the dead.

	When he had heard Ch'en's story, the Dragon King said, 'You certainly helped me. So I shall now give you back your life. I want you to work in my Water Office.'

	While this was happening, Mrs Ch'en was so unhappy with Liu that she could not eat or sleep. But because she was going to have her husband's child, she thought it was best to follow this terrible man quietly. After a long journey they reached Chiang-chou, where Liu the boatman became the new governor.

	Time passed and Mrs Ch'en gave birth to a son. At the same time a mysterious voice whispered in her ear, 'Listen to what I am telling you. This child will be famous around the world. But you must protect him from Liu, who will certainly try to harm him. Your husband is safe with the Dragon King and one day you will all be together again and your enemies will be punished.' Then there was silence. Mrs Ch'en held her son in her arms, but she could think of no other way to protect him.

	And as the voice had said, when Liu returned he ordered the death of the child. But the unhappy mother wanted more time with her son. 'I will put him in the river tomorrow,' she promised Liu. 'Perhaps,' she thought, 'a kind god will save him.'

	She bit her finger and, with her blood, wrote a letter giving the names of the child's parents. Then, so that she would know her child again, she bit off the top of the little toe of his left foot. When morning came, she tied the baby into one of her shirts and went quietly down to the river with him.

	As she stood at the water's edge, a large piece of wood came down the river. Quickly, she tied the shirt with the baby in it to the wood and put the letter she had written in the shirt. Then she pushed the wood to the centre of the river and walked back, crying every step of the way.

	The piece of wood with the baby on it was carried at last to the Temple of the Golden Mountain. The Holy Master, hearing the sound of a baby crying, went to the river and found the strange boat. He read the letter about the child's father, and immediately gave the child the name of River Wood. Then he asked some farmers to look after him.

	Seventeen years later, the young man had been given the new name of Hsuan Tsang and had been made a priest in the Holy Master's temple. One day an old and stupid priest cried out, 'Who do you think you are? No one even knows your real name!' He was jealous of the young man's wisdom.

	The unhappy boy ran to the Holy Master. 'Can there be,' he asked, 'a man without a father or mother?'

	From a hiding-place in his room, the Holy Master took down a small box containing the blood-letter and the shirt. Soon Hsuan Tsang knew the whole story and the terrible wrong done to his parents. He wanted to kill his father's murderer.

	'If you must go,' said the Holy Master, 'take these things with you. Travel as a poor priest, go to Chiang-chou and demand to see your mother.'

	That same night, his mother dreamed of a moon behind the clouds. When the clouds moved, she saw a full moon, and then she thought of her son. 'He must be seventeen by now. Perhaps Heaven will bring us together again.'

	Suddenly, she heard a priest asking for money at the gate and went out to him. When she heard his place of birth, the Golden Mountain, she looked at him closely and said, 'Little priest, you are very like my husband. Who were your parents?'

	'A wrong was done to my parents,' was the answer. 'My Holy Master told me to come here and find my mother. My father's name is Ch'en, but my holy name is Hsuan Tsang.' Then he took from the box the blood-letter and the shirt. She recognised them at once and she put her arms around him.

	'Leave me, leave me!' she cried. 'If Liu finds you, he will kill you. Go now, as fast as lightning! But tomorrow I will say that I have promised a hundred pairs of shoes to the poor and I must journey to the temple to offer this present to the Gods. There we can talk.'

	True to her promise, within five days a hundred pairs of shoes were put on a boat and, with some servants, she made the journey to the Golden Mountain. All the priests came out to welcome the visitor, but when she had prayed she asked them to leave.

	Then, on her knees in front of Hsuan Tsang, she took off the shoe and sock from his left foot. As she expected, the top of his left toe was missing.

	Again the mother and son put their arms around each other, and she thanked the Holy Master for his great kindness. Then she gave Hsuan Tsang a ring to take to the Hotel of Ten Thousand Flowers, where his grandmother had been left behind.

	'Here, also, is a letter to my father in the capital,' she said. 'Tell him to ask the Emperor to send horses and men to kill Liu and save me. Now I dare not stay any longer, but must return home.'

	Hsuan Tsang went to the Hotel of Ten Thousand Flowers and asked about his grandmother. The owner of the hotel told him, 'The lady was here for several years. But she went blind and now, asking people in the streets for money, she lives in a box.'

	Hsuan Tsang finally found his poor grandmother, who cried, 'Oh! I thought my son had forgotten me! And now Heaven has sent a grandson to find me.'

	After paying her bills and leaving her in a comfortable room at the hotel, Hsuan Tsang rushed back to the capital and to the house of Minister Yin. But they refused to let him in. 'No one in our family is a priest,' he was told.

	'Last night I dreamed about my daughter,' said the wife. 'Perhaps he has a message from her.'

	Hsuan Tsang bowed to them and took out the letter that his mother had written. The minister cried, 'Wife! This is our grandchild. Ch'en has been killed and our daughter has been forced to live with the murderer. I will ask the Emperor for soldiers to kill that man.'

	The Emperor was wild with anger and sent an army of sixty thousand men to Chiang-chou. They easily found Liu and took him away to cut his head off.

	Now Yin sent for his daughter. She did not wish to see her father because she was ashamed. Had she not lived as the wife of her husband's murderer? But Yin told her that it was not her fault. He put his arms around her and around his grandson and kept them in his arms for a long, long time.

	By now, the soldiers had found the other boatman, Li, and had cut his head off too. And where he had killed Ch'en, Li's body was cut open. His heart was offered to the soul of the man he had killed.

	The Dragon King heard of this and he sent a message to Ch'en. 'Congratulations! Your wife and her father and your child are all by the river, offering the heart of the man who killed you. I will now return your soul to you and let you go.'

	Mrs Ch'en wanted to throw herself into the river where her husband had died, but suddenly a body came up from the bottom of the river. Mrs Ch'en recognised it as her husband's body and cried and screamed.

	The hands moved, and then the legs, and then the whole body, until Ch'en himself climbed out of the water. He looked at them in great surprise and said, 'What are you all doing here?'

	A great banquet was ordered and next day they all left for home. On the way, they called at the Hotel of Ten Thousand Flowers for the grandmother and took her back to the capital.

	At last Chen became a government advisor. His son, Hsuan Tsang, went back to his work as a priest at the Temple of the Golden Mountain. But when the Emperor died, priests all over China were asked to choose the holiest priest, and they chose Hsuan Tsang.

	At this time, the search was still continuing for a priest holy enough to fetch the Scriptures from India. The Goddess Kuan-yin, realising that the holiest priest was River Wood, said to herself, 'No one could be a better man than him.'

	In the great city of Ch'ang-an, the new Emperor asked Hsuan Tsang to go to India and fetch the Scriptures. When Hsuan Tsang agreed to go, the Emperor said, 'If you dare to go on a journey as long as this, with all its dangers, I will make you here and now the brother of my soul.' Then he bowed four times.

	'If I do not reach India and do not bring the Scriptures back to China, I must be sent to Hell,' the young priest replied.

	The Emperor called for wine and said, 'I suggest that you take the name of the Scriptures in India - Tripitaka. What do you think?'

	Hsuan Tsang accepted the name and from that day he was called Tripitaka.

	It was three days before the full moon when Tripitaka left the gates of Ch'ang-an. After a day or two of hard riding, he reached the Temple of the Low Cloud. There the Holy Master and almost five hundred priests discussed his journey and its terrible dangers and difficulties. Tripitaka pointed in silence to his heart.

	'It is only the heart that can win against difficulties. I have made my promise and I cannot go back until I have reached India, seen Buddha and got the Scriptures.'

	Next morning, Tripitaka got up early. A bright moon was shining on the snow on the ground as he left. Almost immediately, he lost his way, and suddenly the ground moved under his horse. The horse and rider fell into a deep hole.

	'Take him! Take him!'

	Looking up, Tripitaka saw a crowd of ugly creatures looking down at him. They pulled him out of the hole. Their leader was an ugly Demon King, who gave orders to eat him.

	But two dark ugly creatures arrived as guests, and two other men were brought out as a meal for them. The ugly creatures ate like wild animals, their teeth pulling at the men until they had completely eaten them. Watching this, Tripitaka was almost dead with fear.

	But then all the ugly creatures went to sleep. Tripitaka was losing all hope of escape when suddenly an old man appeared. He blew in Tripitaka's face and asked him if the horse belonged to him. Tripitaka saw to his surprise that his horse was not harmed. He asked what this place was and who the ugly creatures were. He was told it was a mountain full of demons and animal-spirits.

	'They did not eat you because your soul was too good,' said the old man.

	'It was your soul that saved you. Follow me and I will show you the way out of here.'

	The old man led him out of that place; then, as Tripitaka turned to thank him, the old man flew up into the sky on a great white bird. A piece of paper blew down, and on it was written, 'I was sent by the Gods to protect you on your journey. Remember, the Gods will be watching you.'

	Tripitaka could only bow low in thanks before he began his journey again. After half a day he found himself in difficult mountain country, moving forward slowly over sharp rocks. In front of him, two tigers waited. Realising the danger, he looked behind him and there he saw an insect that could kill him. On his right stood a wild animal that he had never seen before. His frightened horse went down on its knees.

	As the terrible creatures all started attacking him at once, a man appeared with a sword. He took Tripitaka from his horse.

	'I am a hunter who these animals know and fear. You and I are from the same country and you and your horse can rest at my house until tomorrow.'

	On the way to his house the hunter killed a tiger, saying, 'This is luck! Enough meat to last you for days!'

	Arriving at a mountain farm, Tripitaka was presented to the hunter's mother, who invited him to stay overnight. But when the cooked tiger was put in front of him he had to say that, as a priest, he did not eat meat. He was given rice and salad instead. Then, putting his hands together, he said a prayer.

	The hunter was surprised. 'You priests are certainly strange,' he said. 'You cannot even eat without a prayer.'

	After dinner the hunter led his guest to a little house full of animal skins. Tripitaka did not like that very much, so his host took him instead to a field of red and gold flowers. There, animals ran to him when he called.

	Tripitaka had been asked by the hunter's mother to say prayers for her dead husband. So scriptures were read and prayers were said all through the next day until evening.

	That night everyone in the family dreamed the same dream: the hunter's father had been allowed to leave the Lower World and was born again as the child of a rich landowner. This, they were sure, was a result of Tripitaka's prayers and they all thanked him. They wanted to give him presents of silver, but he refused the presents and left on his journey, with the hunter as his guide.

	At the Mountain Between Two Countries, which was steep and rocky, the hunter climbed quickly but Tripitaka was very tired.

	'This country to the East,' said the hunter, 'is our land of Tang, and to the West is the country of the Tartars. I cannot go into their country, so you must continue alone.'

	Feeling a great fear and hopelessness, Tripitaka held the hunter's arm. Suddenly, from under the mountain, a voice cried, again and again, 'The Master has come.'

	'Who is that?' Tripitaka asked, fearfully.

	'It is the voice of the old monkey calling from his stone box under the mountain. The story is that long ago, when the mountain was called the Mountain of Metal, Wood, Water, Fire and Earth, a magic monkey was put in a stone box by angry gods. He is certainly still alive. You need not be afraid. We will go down and have a look.'

	As the hunter had said, there was a stone box with a hole in it, and through the opening they could see the head of a monkey.

	'Master! Master! Free me from here and I will protect you on your journey to the West!'

	The hunter said, 'First, we want to know more about you.'

	'I will not tell you anything,' said Monkey. 'I wish to speak to the priest.'

	'What do you want to say to me?' asked Tripitaka.

	'Were you sent by the Emperor of T'ang to fetch the Scriptures from India?'

	'I was.'

	'I am the Monkey King and five hundred years ago I made trouble, so Buddha put me in this stone box. The Goddess Kuan-yin has visited me. She said that if I protect the pilgrim on his way to India I will be forgiven and freed. So let me be your follower.'

	'But how can I get you out of this stone box?'

	'If you make a wish, Master, I will be out,' said Monkey. 'Go to the top of the mountain and there you will see a rock with letters of gold written by Buddha himself. Lift the rock and I will be free.'

	'How can we believe him?' the hunter whispered to Tripitaka.

	'It is true! It is true!' screamed Monkey, from inside his box.

	Tripitaka and the hunter climbed up again to the top of the mountain, and there they saw golden light pouring from a rock which had gold writing on it.

	Tripitaka went down on his knees and said, 'If this is the wish of the Gods, I will take this Monkey with me to India. Take away this rock and free him.'

	A warm and sweet-smelling wind blew across the mountain and lifted the rock and Buddha's writing up into the air. Tripitaka and the hunter returned to Monkey.

	'You can come out,' they said. With a great noise of breaking stone, Monkey came out of the stone box and bowed in front of Tripitaka. He cried, 'Master, I am out,' and then he began to prepare Tripitaka's horse for the journey.

	Tripitaka thanked the hunter for his kindness and he and Monkey continued their journey.

	When Tripitaka and Monkey left the mountain, a tiger appeared in front of them, showing its teeth. Monkey seemed very happy. 'He has come to give me his coat,' he said.

	He took a needle from behind his ear and the needle was immediately transformed into a cudgel. 'It is five hundred years since I last used this weapon,' he cried.

	Look at Monkey! He walks forward bravely, down comes the cudgel, and the tiger falls dead.

	'Sit down,' said Monkey to Tripitaka, 'while I take his coat.'

	Dear Monkey! He took a single hair from his own tail, blew on it, and said some magic words. The hair became a sharp little knife, and with this knife he cut off the tiger's skin. 'Now we can leave this place,' he said. 'When we reach the next house, I will make a fine coat from the skin.'

	Monkey then explained the magic of his cudgel, which was not only for killing tigers and dragons, but also for making rivers go backwards or starting storms on the sea. But then he saw a house in some trees, where they could spend the night.

	He got down from his horse and cried, 'Open the door!'

	A very old man, angry at the rude command, began to push open the door. But seeing Monkey carrying a tiger skin and looking like a demon, he became very frightened. Then he saw that Monkey was with a priest and he was told that Monkey was the priest's follower. Suddenly, he recognised Monkey.

	'You are the Stone Monkey in the stone box,' said the old man in great surprise. 'How did you get out?'

	Monkey told his story and then was asked his age.

	'First, how old are you?' asked Monkey.

	'One hundred and thirty.'

	'You are young enough to be my great-great-grandson,' said Monkey. 'I was under that mountain for five hundred years.'

	'True,' said the old man. 'And when I was a boy, there was grass on your head and dirt on your face.'

	'Yes!' said Monkey. 'I do not wish to make trouble, but it is five hundred years since I last washed. Could you let us have a little hot water?'

	When they had both washed, Monkey took Tripitaka's white shirt, made himself a tiger-skin coat and asked, 'How do I look in these clothes?'

	'Fine!' said Tripitaka. 'You really look like a pilgrim!' And he let Monkey keep the shirt.

	Many days later, the two travellers were attacked by six men with swords.

	The men demanded their horses and everything they had with them.

	'You are just thieves!' cried Monkey. 'If you give me one seventh of everything you have ever stolen, I will let you live.'

	Angrily, they all hit Monkey on the head, again and again.

	Monkey said, 'Let me know when you are tired and I will take out my needle.'

	Of course the needle from behind Monkey's ear transformed itself into a cudgel, and soon he had killed all six of them. He returned, crying, 'Master, we can start now. I have killed them all.'

	'You should never kill,' said Tripitaka, sadly.

	'But I had to! They were going to kill you!'

	'It is better for a priest to die than to kill others.'

	'Well, I can tell you that I have killed quite a lot of people. And I am still the great Monkey King!' answered Monkey.

	'Your bad behaviour in Heaven caused you to live in a stone box for five hundred years,' said Tripitaka. 'If you hope to come with me to India, you will need to change your ways.'

	Monkey was very angry that Tripitaka had spoken to him like that. 'Master,' he shouted, 'I am leaving.'

	Tripitaka said nothing, so Monkey leapt up, ran away and was soon out of Tripitaka's sight.

	Tripitaka thought, 'It is no use trying to teach people who are like that.' So, putting all the luggage on the horse's back, he left alone and on foot.

	The young priest had not gone far when he met an old woman carrying a cap. She asked him why he was travelling alone without a follower to help him.

	'I had a follower, but he behaved badly. When I told him that, he ran away.'

	'That is unfortunate,' she said. 'This cap belonged to my son, who died. I can gladly give it to your follower if he would like it.'

	'He ran away to the East,' said Tripitaka.

	'Then he will certainly go to my house and I shall send him back. If you want him to return, you will need a spell.' She told him the words. 'You must make him wear this cap. When he disobeys, say the words of the spell and he will give you no more trouble.'

	The old woman transformed herself into a golden light and disappeared towards the East. Tripitaka knew then that she was really the Goddess Kuan-yin.

	Monkey had jumped on to a cloud and was returning to his cave in the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit. On the way, he decided to drink tea with the Dragon King. When Monkey had told his story, the Dragon King told him about the value of patience.

	'Monkey King, it is necessary to control yourself if you do not want to spoil all your chances.'

	Monkey thought about that and then jumped up. 'Don't say another word!' he said. 'I will return to my Master at once.'

	'Master,' said Monkey, when he found Tripitaka sitting sadly by the side of the road, 'what are you doing, still sitting here?'

	'Waiting for you,' he answered. 'I could not continue alone.'

	'I only went to drink tea with the Dragon King,' said Monkey.

	'If that is true, you should think about my thirst and my hunger too.'

	Monkey went to their luggage to look for food and found the gift of the cap.

	'If a person wears that cap,' said Tripitaka, 'they can recite the Scriptures without learning them first.'

	'Let me put it on!' cried Monkey.

	'Yes, put it on.'

	As Monkey put it on, Tripitaka pretended to eat some dried fruit, but he was really reciting the magic spell.

	'My head is hurting!' screamed Monkey.

	Monkey fell on the ground, trying to take the cap off, but a metal ring inside the cap was getting tighter and tighter. Tripitaka stopped reciting the spell because he was afraid that Monkey would break the metal ring.

	The pain in Monkey's head disappeared, but the cap was still tightly there.

	'You have put a spell on me,' cried Monkey.

	'Yes,' said Tripitaka. 'It is called the Scripture of the Tight Cap. Will you make trouble again?'

	'Never! I promise,' answered Monkey, but in his heart he was very angry. He ran at Tripitaka with his cudgel.

	Quickly, the priest again recited the words of the spell, and Monkey fell to the ground screaming. The cudgel dropped from his hand.

	'Were you going to hit me?' Tripitaka asked.

	'Hit you? I dare not!' cried Monkey.

	Tripitaka stopped reciting because he did not like to see Monkey suffering such terrible pain.

	'Who taught you this trick?' Monkey asked when the pain stopped.

	'An old woman who I met recently.'

	'Then it was the Goddess Kuan-yin. I will go to the Southern Ocean and hit her with my cudgel!'

	'As she taught me this spell, she can surely use it herself,' said Tripitaka.

	Monkey sat up, holding his head, which still hurt him. 'I am very sorry,' he said. 'I will travel to India and never leave you. I will protect you until the end.'

	Unable to defend himself, Monkey put the luggage together, and they started off again towards the West.



	CHAPTER three

	Tripitaka Finds New Followers

	With her magic breath she shouted 'Change!' She transformed the Dragon into the horse that he had just eaten.

	It was the middle of winter and a cold wind was blowing from the North.

	There was ice everywhere and deep snow was lying on the ground. But the brave priest, his follower and the white horse continued their journey across the mountains.

	They were looking down at a river when suddenly a dragon appeared in it and then climbed slowly out of the water. While Monkey and Tripitaka ran and hid, the Dragon, moving along at speed and without stopping, opened its mouth and ate the horse.

	Monkey left Tripitaka sitting on a rock and went back to get the horse and luggage, but he could not find the horse. He took the luggage to the place where he had left Tripitaka.

	'The Dragon is gone,' said Monkey, 'and the horse is too. It probably ran away because it was frightened.'

	'How are we going to find it?' asked Tripitaka.

	'Wait here and I will have a look,' said Monkey.

	Monkey leapt into the sky and looked for it with his bright red eyes.

	'I cannot see it anywhere,' he told Tripitaka. 'I think the Dragon ate it.'

	'How can I travel if it has been eaten? It is much too far to walk,' cried Tripitaka. Poor Tripitaka was so sad that he could not stop crying.

	Monkey, who hated that kind of attitude, shouted at Tripitaka, 'You look like a fool, sitting there crying! Wait there while I go after the Dragon.'

	'You cannot do anything to the Dragon if he is in the water,' said the young priest, still crying. 'And next time he will eat me!

	'You are hopeless! Hopeless!' shouted Monkey, angrier than ever. 'Do you want to sit there staring at the luggage forever?'

	He was still shouting angrily when the voices of Gods were heard in the sky. 'Monkey, don't be angry. Priest, don't cry. We are here to protect you,' they said.

	'Then you had better stay here and look after the Master,' said Monkey. 'I am going to find that horse! Don't worry about me!'

	Tripitaka, feeling better, asked Monkey to be careful.

	Dear Monkey! He pulled his tiger-skin coat around his body, picked up his cudgel and walked down to the river.

	'You demon fish, return my horse to me,' he called into the water.

	The Dragon leapt out of the river. 'Who is making all that noise?' it shouted, angrily.

	'Come and fight,' shouted Monkey, as he waved his cudgel. 'And give me back my horse!'

	Monkey hit the Dragon's head with his cudgel. The Dragon came forwards with his mouth wide open. It was a long and brave fight. They fought backwards and forwards, round and round, and up and down until the Dragon began to feel weak. With a quick turn of his long tail, he disappeared back into the river. Monkey shouted for him to come back and fight, but the Dragon did not listen. Monkey decided to go back and tell Tripitaka.

	When Monkey returned, Tripitaka said something that Monkey did not like. 'The other day, after you fought the tiger, you said you could also kill dragons. I do not understand why you are having such difficulties with this dragon.'

	'Not another word!' he cried. 'I will soon show you who is master!'

	Annoyed, Monkey went back to the river and used his magic to make a storm. The Dragon leapt up and shouted, 'What sort of creature are you? Where do you come from?'

	'That is not your business - just return my horse!'

	'How can I? Your horse is inside me. And if I do not, what will you do to me?'

	'Look at this cudgel,' said Monkey. 'If you do not give me back the horse, you will pay for it with your life.'

	Again they fought, and then the Dragon transformed himself into an insect and disappeared into the long grass. Beating the grass with his cudgel, Monkey danced around wildly, trying to find him. But it was impossible. So Monkey returned to Tripitaka, who was feeling quite sorry for himself.

	'I will be dead from cold or hunger before we get across this river,' said Tripitaka.

	Monkey danced and jumped and leapt in anger, but finally he had to ask the Goddess Kuan-yin for help. When he saw her, he became angry again.

	'You told me to look after this priest,' shouted Monkey. 'So why did you give him a cap that I cannot take off my head? It gives me terrible pains when he says the words of the spell!'

	The Goddess laughed. 'Because you are so full of tricks, there is no other way to control you.'

	'But what about this dragon? That is your work too. Why did you let him eat my Master's horse? You should be ashamed of yourself!'

	'That dragon,' said the Goddess Kuan-yin, 'behaved badly in Heaven. If he carries the priest of the Emperor T'ang on his journey to India, he will be forgiven and he knows this. No ordinary Chinese horse could possibly do it. I cannot understand why he ate the horse. I will go with you and find out.'

	She got down from her seat inside her cave and rode on a magic light to find the Dragon. When the Dragon saw Kuan-yin, he changed into a human.

	'Did you know that this is Tripitaka's follower?' asked Kuan-yin.

	'How could I? I asked him what kind of creature he was and he shouted at me, "That is not your business." I ate his horse because I was hungry. He never said anything about looking for Scriptures. He never once used the word "T'ang".'

	'Monkey is fonder of showing others his own powers than explaining anything,' said Kuan-yin. 'But in future, if anyone questions him, he must say that he is looking for Scriptures. Then there will be no more trouble.'

	The Goddess went to the Dragon and put some drops of sweet water on him. Then with her magic breath she shouted 'Change!' She transformed the Dragon into the horse that he had just eaten. She told the Dragon to change his bad behaviour and to promise never to go back to his old ways.

	'If you keep this promise, you will be given a golden body,' she told him, 'and you will be given wisdom.'

	The Dragon said, 'Thank you. I will keep this promise.'

	Then the Goddess turned to go, but Monkey held her arm saying, 'That is not good enough! How can I help a priest to travel over these mountains with only a horse? I cannot continue this journey.'

	'That is strange,' said the Goddess. 'You always used to be brave, if nothing else. But there is one more power I can give you.'

	She took three leaves from a tree and dropped them on Monkey's back, where they immediately became magic hairs.

	'These,' she said, 'will get you out of any trouble.'

	Monkey thanked her. Then he took the horse and led him to Tripitaka.

	'This horse is in much better condition than the old one. How did you manage to find it?' asked Tripitaka.

	Monkey answered, 'Kuan-yin changed the Dragon into the horse that he had eaten.'

	Tripitaka wanted to say 'thank you' to Kuan-yin, but Monkey said that she was already far away. So Tripitaka bowed towards the South. Then he helped Monkey to prepare their luggage.

	'We still need a boat to cross this river,' said the priest.

	'Just sit on the horse and he will carry you across,' Monkey replied.

	But then an old fisherman in a strange boat appeared. Monkey waved to him. 'We have come from the East to fetch scriptures. My Master does not know how to get across the river. Could you take him?

	The old fisherman took them all across the river, without asking for payment.

	'Do you know who that fisherman was?' said Monkey. 'He is the God of the River and he did not help us in our fight against the Dragon. He knew he had done wrong. That is why he did not take any money.'

	Tripitaka did not know how true that story was. But he sat on the horse and followed Monkey along the road to the West.

	One evening they saw a group of houses in the far distance.

	'Let me go and see if it is a farm and if it seems lucky or unlucky,' said Monkey.

	A young man in a blue jacket came out of the farm and tried to walk past Monkey without a word. But Monkey held his arm tightly while the young man tried to escape.

	'Now, you must not be angry,' laughed Monkey, holding him even tighter. 'We only want to know the name of this place.'

	The young man, seeing that he could not get away from Monkey, answered, 'The place is called Kao Farm and I am Kao Ts'ai. Old Mr Kao has a daughter of twenty who is unmarried. Three years ago, a creature took her and has lived with her here as his wife. Six months ago the creature locked her in his little house, and none of the family has seen her since then. I am going to find someone with strong enough magic to fight this creature.'

	'This is your lucky day,' said Monkey. 'Here I am, and I can help you. Come, lead us to the master of the house.'

	'Your words are true, I hope,' said the young man. 'You will get me into great trouble if you fail.'

	'I promise,' said Monkey. 'Now, take us in.'

	Seeing the young man returning, old Mr Kao shouted, 'You fool!' But he quickly became more polite when he saw the young priest. Seeing Monkey, though, he said, 'It is surely bad enough to have a dirty creature living with my daughter. Now another ugly creature has come to visit me.'

	'You have lived a long time but have learned very little wisdom,' said Monkey. 'You should not judge people only by appearances. But I shall return your daughter to you.'

	'I do not understand. I thought you wanted a bed for the night.'

	'Yes, we do,' said Monkey. 'But I am also happy to kill any dirty creatures for you, for something to do.'

	'We have three daughters. Our hope was that the youngest would marry a farmer and work this farm. Well, about three years ago, a nice-looking young man came here and said his name was Pig. He seemed the right man for our daughter and at first he worked hard on the farm. But then he started to change: his nose became longer, his ears became bigger, he ate more and more. Finally, he turned into a pig. But that was not all. He could bring magic winds, he could disappear and then appear again, he could make stones fly through the air. And now he keeps our daughter, Blue Flower, in his little house, and for six months we have not known if she is alive or dead.'

	'Have no fear,' said Monkey. 'I shall catch him tonight and return your daughter to you.'

	'But do you need weapons?'

	'I have my weapon already,' said Monkey, taking his needle from behind his ear and changing it into an iron cudgel. 'I need only a nice old person to sit with my Master and talk to him. And now I will leave you!'

	Old Mr Kao led Monkey to the little house and Monkey broke the door with one blow of his hand. Inside it was dark as the old man called, 'Number three daughter!'

	'Father, I am here.'

	Monkey looked hard with his red eyes and saw a sad sight. The daughter's face was unwashed, her hair was full of dirt and her lips were pale. She walked slowly forwards and fell, crying, into her father's arms.

	'Don't make that noise. But where is the creature?' asked Monkey.

	'I do not know,' said the unhappy girl. 'He goes out early in the morning and does not come back until late at night.'

	'Take your daughter back to the house and stay with her,' said Monkey to Mr Kao. 'I shall wait here and end your troubles.'

	When the girl and her father had gone, Monkey transformed himself into a girl who looked like Blue Flower. Then he waited. Soon stones came flying through the air and there in front of him stood a terrible creature. He had short hairs on his dark skin, a long nose and enormous ears. He wore a green jacket and had a spotted handkerchief tied round his head.

	Dear Monkey! He did not say hello to the creature. He lay on the bed making noises like a person who is ill. When the creature tried to kiss him, he pushed it hard across the room.

	'Why are you angry with me?' asked the creature.

	'I am not angry. Get into bed.'

	The creature undressed in the dark, but could not find his wife in the bed. Then he heard her crying on the far side of the room.

	'Oh, I am so unhappy!'

	'What are you complaining about?' asked the creature. 'Have I not kept my promises to you? I have worked on the farm, built walls and dug new fields. You have all the food and clothes that you need.'

	'That is not the problem,' said Monkey in Blue Flower's voice. 'Today my parents came and shouted through the wall that you are ugly. And nobody knows anything about you or who you are.'

	'There is no mystery about who I am. Because I look a little like a pig, I am called Pigsy. Next time they ask, just tell them that.'

	'They are looking for a priest to send you away,' said Monkey. 'In fact, old Mr Kao has called the great Monkey King himself to help.'

	'If that is true, I am leaving this minute,' cried the creature. 'That Monkey is very powerful!' And getting dressed quickly, he opened the door to leave.

	With a magic spell, Monkey transformed himself back again.

	'Look around,' he cried, 'and you will see that I am Monkey.'

	When Pigsy turned and saw Monkey, with his sharp little teeth and big smile, his red eyes, flat head and hairy face, he ran like the wind back to his cave.

	Monkey cried after him, 'Where are you going? If you go up to Heaven, I will follow you. And if you go down to the deepest part of Hell, I will follow you there too.'

	Monkey followed the creature to his cave and it came out waving a fork.

	They fought together all night, but at last the creature leapt back into the cave and locked the door. Monkey now saw the name of the cave on a rock: it was Cloud-Ladder Cave.

	'I had better return to my Master now, because he might want something,' Monkey thought. 'I can always return and catch this creature.' And leaping from one cloud to another, he was soon back at the farm.

	No one had slept all night, waiting for Monkey's return. Tripitaka was sitting with the old man when Monkey arrived.

	'Master, here I am,' he said.

	'Did you have to go a long way to catch the creature?' asked Tripitaka.

	'That is no ordinary creature. He used to live in Heaven, where he was in charge of water-spirits. But he did wrong and he was sent down to Earth as a pig-like creature. He still has all his magic powers. I chased him to his mountain cave, where he fetched a large fork and we fought all night. As the sun came up, he gave up the fight and locked himself in his cave. I was going to beat down the door, but I knew it was going to take some time. I thought Master might be getting anxious so I wanted to report back here.'

	'Monkey King,' said old Mr Kao, 'you have driven him away, but he is certain to come back. If you can get him for us, you can have half of all that is ours.'

	'I think you worry too much about him. He knows that he eats a lot. But he has also done a lot of work around here. He feels that his work easily pays for the cost of feeding him. He is a god who has been sent to Earth as a punishment. It seems that he has done no harm to your daughter,' said Monkey.

	'It is true,' said old Mr Kao, 'that he has done her no harm. But it is very bad for our family name. Everywhere I go, I hear, "Mr Kao has taken a dirty creature for his daughter's husband." What can I say to that?'

	'Monkey,' said Tripitaka, 'do you not think that you should return? Have one more fight with him and see if you can find a way to end this difficult situation.'

	'Don't worry. I was only having a little game with him. This time I will catch him and bring him back here. Look after my Master until I get back!' Monkey said to Mr Kao.

	Monkey disappeared into the clouds and soon arrived at the cave. This time, Pigsy was asleep in his cave when Monkey broke the door in pieces. Angrily, Pigsy jumped out of bed and took up his fork again.

	'You dirty rat! What do you think you are doing? It is a crime to break down someone else's door!' shouted Pigsy. 'I remember you now...' he said, looking more closely at Monkey. 'You once lived in a cave behind a Water Curtain. How did you get here?'

	'I am a priest now. I am going with a Chinese pilgrim called Tripitaka to fetch scriptures from India.'

	The fork fell from Pigsy's hand. 'Where is the pilgrim?' he said. 'Take me to him.'

	'Why do you want to see him?' asked Monkey.

	'The Goddess Kuan-yin put me here to prepare myself for the arrival of a pilgrim who I must follow. After doing this, I will receive wisdom. I have been waiting for this pilgrim for years. Why did you not tell me that you are his follower? Why did you prefer to fight with me?'

	'I am not so sure that your story is true. If you really want to follow my Master to India, you must promise that this story is true. Then I will take you to him.'

	Pigsy threw himself down on his knees and bowed repeatedly. 'I promise holy Buddha, this is true - every word. If it is not true, let the judges in Heaven cut me into ten thousand pieces.'

	'I believe you,' said Monkey, 'but give me your fork.' Then Monkey took a hair, blew on it with his magic breath, and changed it into a long thick string.

	He tied Pigsy's hands behind his back, took him by the ear and pulled him along with him.

	When Monkey arrived at Mr Kao's farm with Pigsy, everyone was very happy. After hearing Pigsy's story, Tripitaka told Monkey to untie him. Tripitaka said some prayers and then they sat down and ate supper together.

	The next day, Tripitaka sat on the white horse that had been a dragon. Pigsy carried the luggage and Monkey carried his cudgel, as they all left for the West.

	At last they came to a flat country. Summer had passed and autumn had come, and now in front of them was a great, wild river.

	Monkey leapt into the air and looked far down into the water.

	'Master,' he reported, 'this will not be easy. For me, it will not be difficult because I can jump across in one leap, but for you it will be impossible. When I looked down, I saw that this river is twelve thousand kilometres across.' Tripitaka was very unhappy but, looking down, he saw a rock with some writing which said River of Sands. Under that, in small letters, were the words:

	In the River of Sands, twelve thousand wide,

	In Dead Waters, fifteen thousand deep,

	Nothing will stay on the water -

	Even the lightest flower goes straight to the bottom.

	As they looked, a terrible creature came towards them through the water. His eyes were like bright lights, and around his neck were nine heads. He rushed straight at the pilgrims.

	Monkey pushed Tripitaka to a safe place while Pigsy attacked the creature with his fork. The creature fought hard and the fight was a good one. Monkey was impatient to join in and at last, with a wild scream, he leapt at the creature. As he brought his cudgel down on its head, it disappeared into the water.

	Pigsy was very angry. 'Brother, who asked you to fight my fight? That creature was just getting tired and I had almost finished him. You have spoilt everything.'

	'I am sorry,' laughed Monkey. 'But I could not stand and watch. I have not used my cudgel for months and I got so excited that I could not stop myself. I wanted to join the fun.'

	So, hand in hand, they returned to Tripitaka.

	'It will be your turn next time,' promised Pigsy.

	'Thank you, but I am really not at my best in water,' said Monkey. 'I am happier in the clouds and I have enough tricks on land. If you can make this creature leave the river, I will come and help you.'

	Pigsy went into the river and discovered that he had not lost his water-magic. He soon found the creature at the bottom of the river.

	'You ugly pig,' the creature shouted. 'Can you not see that I am not an ordinary creature? I am a god. One day, at a banquet in Heaven, I accidentally broke the Jade Emperor's bowl. He was very angry and I was sent down here to the River of Sands. When I am hungry, as I am now, I eat people. You would taste very good if I cut you up and put some sugar and salt on you.'

	'You will not eat me! You can eat my fork!'

	So again they started fighting, and they fought for two hours. After that, Pigsy pretended to be tired and ready to stop. When he left the water and climbed on to the land, the creature followed.

	'Come on,' cried Pigsy. 'With the hard earth under our feet, we will have a better fight than we did before.'

	'I know what you are trying to do,' said the creature. 'You are trying to get me out of the river so your friend can help you. We will go back in the water and finish the fight there.'

	The creature refused to move, so they fought on the water's edge. Monkey was watching from a distance.

	'Wait here,' he said to Tripitaka, 'while I try one of my tricks.'

	Monkey leapt into the air and jumped straight down at the creature. But the creature saw him coming and ran back into the water.

	'He is probably not going to come out again,' Monkey said.

	'This is difficult,' said Pigsy. 'What are we going to do?'

	'Let's go and see the Master,' said Monkey.

	They told Tripitaka, who started crying loudly. 'We will never get across,' he said sadly.

	'Don't worry,' Monkey said. 'It is true that we cannot get across yet. That creature is a terrible problem, but he is not going to stop us.'

	'What are we going to do?' asked Pigsy.

	'Pigsy,' said Monkey, 'stay here with the Master while I go to the Southern Ocean to find the Goddess Kuan-yin. This search for the Scriptures was her idea and she must help us now.'

	'You had better go now,' said Tripitaka, 'and get back here quickly.'

	Leaping through the clouds, Monkey reached the Southern Ocean in no time at all. He found the Goddess with the Dragon King's daughter.

	'Why are you not looking after your Master?' she asked at once.

	'When we came to the River of Sands,' said Monkey, 'we found a creature that we cannot destroy. He is a very good fighter. My friend Pigsy tried hard to beat him, but he was not successful. This is why I have come to you.'

	'Monkey, do you ever listen? It is the same story again and again. Why did you not say that you are with the Priest of T'ang?'

	'I suppose we were too busy trying to catch him,' said Monkey.

	'I put him there. I intended him to help the Master and his pilgrims,' said Kuan-yin. 'You did not tell him that you were from China and looking for the Scriptures, did you? That was your mistake. He is there to help you, you fool!'

	'He is sitting at the bottom of the river and he is not happy,' said Monkey. 'How can I make him come out and help us? And how is Tripitaka going to get across the river?'

	Kuan-yin gave a red water-bottle to her follower Hui-yen. She told him,

	'Go with Monkey to the river and shout "Sandy!" The creature will come out at once. Take him to the Master. Then put this red water-bottle in the middle of the nine heads that he wears around his neck. A ship will be sent from the Gods. It will carry Tripitaka across the River of Sands.'

	Hui-yen went to the river and called, 'Sandy, Sandy! Come out and meet the Master and his pilgrims. They are looking for the Scriptures and they have been here for a long time.'

	The creature came up at once. He bowed politely and asked, 'Where are the pilgrims?'

	'They are sitting over there, on the eastern side,' replied Hui-yen.

	'Well,' said Sandy, looking at Pigsy, 'that dirty creature never said a word about Scriptures and I fought with him for two whole days.' Then, seeing Monkey, he cried, 'Him too? I am not going near them.'

	'The first is Pigsy,' said Hui-yen, 'and the second is Monkey. They are both Tripitaka's followers and both were made priests by Kuan-yin. You have nothing to fear. I myself will introduce you to the Master.'

	Sandy came out of the river, tidied himself and went down on his knees in front of Tripitaka. He said, 'I did not recognise you, Master, so forgive me for being so impolite.'

	'You rude creature,' said Pigsy, 'why did you want to fight with us, instead of joining us from the beginning?'

	'Brother,' laughed Monkey, 'don't be angry with him, because it is all our fault. We never told him that we are going to get the Scriptures.'

	'Do you really want to be a priest in our religion?' asked Tripitaka.

	Sandy said that he did, so Monkey was asked to shave Sandy's head.

	Monkey took a knife and soon Sandy had no hair left on his head.

	Sandy bowed many times in front of Tripitaka, but only once in front of Monkey and Pigsy. Tripitaka liked Sandy's new appearance and he was very pleased with his new follower.

	'You had better be quick and start your boat-building,' said Hui-yen.

	Taking the heads from his neck, Sandy laid them at the edge of the water in the shape of a magic square. He put Kuan-yin's water-bottle in the middle. At once, the heads and the bottle became a ship, sent by the Gods.

	Tripitaka came down to the water and walked on to the holy ship. Pigsy supported him on the left, Sandy on the right. Monkey, behind him, held on to the white horse, which followed as well as it could. They soon arrived perfectly safely at the other side.



	CHAPTER four

	A Dead King and a Competition

	Then Manjusri said a spell, the magician returned to his tiger shape, and the God rode him away over the clouds.

	Tripitaka sat in the Great Hall of the Wood Temple reciting the True Scriptures. It was midnight and he was tired. Soon he lay across his reading desk and slept. Although his eyes were closed, he seemed to know what was happening. He heard a voice outside the Hall whispering 'Master.'

	Tripitaka lifted his head. In his dream he saw a man who was wet from head to foot. When he looked more closely, he saw that the man was a king. The King told Tripitaka his story:

	'Five years ago, the rain stopped falling, the grass stopped growing and all my people were dying of hunger. I prayed to the Gods, but still the rivers were empty. But then a magician came who could call the wind and the rain. I asked him to pray for rain and he did. The rain came pouring down. For the next two years I was very kind to this magician. Then, in spring, when the two of us were walking by the great water hole in my palace, I suddenly saw a white light and he pushed me into the hole. He covered the top of it and then made a tree grow over it. Pity me! I have been dead for three years and nobody knows.'

	Tripitaka was white with fear, but at last he said, 'Why did nobody look for you?'

	'Ah, with his great power the magician transformed himself into a man who looked like me. Now he is the king of my people. But the Night Spirit blew me to you and gave me hope with talk of a great Monkey King who can kill demons with his cudgel.'

	'But everybody in your country thinks that the magician is you. My follower would be attacked if he tried to help,' said Tripitaka.

	'I have a son, the Prince, who spends most of his time in the Palace of Golden Bells. He is not allowed to see his mother, the Queen, because she might say something. He knows nothing about his true father except that I had this piece of white jade.'

	'But how can a poor priest like me get to the Palace of Golden Bells?'

	'Tomorrow my son will hunt with three thousand followers, and when you give him the jade he will know what to do. But now I must tell my Queen everything in a dream.'

	As he turned to go, the dead king hit his head on the floor and Tripitaka woke up. 'Followers!' he called. 'Where are my followers?'

	'Now what?' said Pigsy. 'I was happier with my old life, although the food was bad. Now I am woken up in the middle of the night to look after a priest.'

	'I had a strange dream,' said Tripitaka, uncertainly.

	Monkey then came in and said, 'Master, your dreams come from your waking thoughts because you worry all the time. I think only of seeing Buddha in the West, and no dream comes near me.'

	But Tripitaka made Monkey listen to the dead king's story.

	'Say no more,' said Monkey. 'This is work for me!'

	'The King left this,' said Tripitaka, remembering, and he gave Monkey the piece of jade.

	Dear Monkey! He pulled a hair from his tail, blew on it, and said a magic spell. When a beautiful small box appeared, he put the piece of jade in it.

	'In the early morning,' he told Tripitaka, 'read the Scriptures in the Great Hall. I shall transform myself into a little priest, five centimetres high, and I shall jump into the box with the jade. When the Prince opens the box, I shall jump out, show him the jade and tell him the dream.'

	Both the follower and his teacher were too excited to sleep that night. At last, the first light of morning came in the East. After giving whispered orders to Pigsy and Sandy to wait quietly for him, Monkey leapt into the air and flew.

	At once, his red eyes found a walled city to the West. The sadness of its people hung in clouds over the city. But as Monkey was watching this sad sight, the gates opened and the huntsmen came out. It was clear from his fine clothes which huntsman was the Prince.

	'Let me play a trick on him,' said Monkey to himself.

	Dear Monkey! Coming down from his cloud, he transformed himself into a small woodland animal and ran in front of the Prince's horse. The Prince chased it and the huntsmen followed the Prince. Soon, Monkey had led all of them to the Wood Temple.

	'Of course, I have known of this place,' said the Prince, 'although I have never visited it. I will go in.'

	As the Prince and his followers went into the Great Hall, everybody welcomed him and bowed, except Tripitaka. The angry Prince told his followers to take the priest and tie him up. But Monkey, now five centimetres high and in the box, told the Gods to protect Tripitaka, so the huntsmen could not touch him.

	'What magic are you using,' asked the Prince, 'to protect yourself?'

	'I have no magic,' replied Tripitaka. 'I am only a priest from China, on the way to India to fetch the Scriptures. But in this box there is someone who knows something very important.'

	As he spoke, Tripitaka opened the box and out leapt a very small Monkey.

	The Prince laughed and said, 'What can that little creature know!'

	But Monkey, to the great surprise of everybody, used his magic to return to his full size. 'Prince,' he said, 'please listen to me. Five years ago your country had no food because no rain fell, but then a magician came and he brought rain. Is this true?'

	'Yes, yes, yes. Go on!'

	'And what happened to the magician?'

	'Three years ago, when he and my father were walking in the garden, a magic wind blew a piece of jade out of the King's hand and the magician went back to his mountains with it. But the King, my father, still misses the magician and he has locked the garden.'

	Monkey laughed, but he asked the huntsmen to move away so he could speak privately to the Prince. 'Sir, it was your father who disappeared. The man in the palace is the magician who brought rain.'

	'That is not true!' said the Prince.

	'Here is the piece of jade,' said Monkey.

	'You stole the jade!' shouted the Prince to the priest. 'Take him away!'

	Tripitaka shouted fearfully to Monkey, 'Oh Monkey, you fool. What have you done?'

	'Wait!' cried Monkey. 'I am the Monkey King and a follower of Tripitaka. Last night in this temple your father came to my Master in a dream. He told him that the magician had pushed him into a great water hole in the palace and changed into a man who looked like him. He could then pretend to be the king.

	I changed into a hunted animal to lead you here because I wanted to tell you this. Will you believe my story or not?' The young Prince did not know what to believe. 'Ride home,' suggested Monkey. 'Take this piece of jade with you and ask your mother, the Queen, if the present king is her husband.'

	The young Prince agreed and went back to the palace. He found his mother, the Queen, still worried about a dream she had had the night before.

	'Mother,' said the Prince, 'forgive my words before I speak them. Compare your life with my father in the last three years with the years before that, and tell me if his love is as warm today.'

	In answer the Queen recited:

	'Three years ago something warm and kind. These last three years has been as cold as ice.'

	The Prince told his mother everything that he had heard that day. Then he showed her the piece of jade.

	'Oh, my son,' said the Queen, 'when you came I was crying because of a dream I had last night. I dreamt I saw your father. His head was under water and he was dead. But his soul had visited a priest of T'ang and asked him to destroy the magician. He also asked him to save his own body from where it had been thrown. Go quickly and ask that priest to help us.'

	The young prince ran out, jumped on his horse, rode back to the Wood Temple and asked the pilgrims to find his father. So the next night Monkey and Pigsy were at the gates of the locked Flower Garden. But Monkey had told Pigsy that there was gold at the bottom of the water hole. He had said nothing about the dead king.

	Pigsy brought his fork down on the lock of the gates and broke it. Inside the garden, Monkey could not stop himself jumping and shouting happily.

	'Brother,' said Pigsy, 'you will ruin us, making all that noise!'

	'Why are you trying to make me nervous?' said Monkey.

	They found the tree that the magician had planted on top of the hole. 'Now, Pigsy, the gold is hidden under this tree,' said Monkey.

	At once, the fool Pigsy hit the tree with his fork until it fell down. Then he used his nose to dig under it until, about a metre down, he found a big stone. 'Brother!' he cried. 'This is luck. The gold will be under this.'

	Pigsy used his nose again and lifted the big stone. Below it something was shining. 'That is the gold!' cried Pigsy. But looking closer, they saw it was the light of the stars and the moon in the water.

	Monkey made his cudgel grow until it was ten metres long, and Pigsy climbed down it. When he was in the water, he began to swim. Monkey called down to him, 'The gold is at the bottom.'

	So Pigsy dived down and, opening his eyes again, saw a door with a sign on it that said The Palace at the Bottom of the Water Hole. Pigsy went in and a servant called out, 'Great King, something awful has happened - a priest with a long nose has come in.

	The Dragon King of the Water Hole was not surprised. 'That must be Pigsy,' he explained. 'He has come with the Monkey King to find the dishonest magician. Please come in and sit down,' he called to Pigsy.

	Pigsy, happy and wet, sat in the best seat and asked, 'Where is the gold?'

	'I am sorry,' said the Dragon King, 'but I live down here in this hole and never see the sky above. Where would I get gold from?'

	'Oh, please!' said Pigsy. 'I know it is here somewhere, so you had better bring it out.'

	'I have one thing that is of value. You can look,' said the Dragon King. He led Pigsy to the body of the dead king. Pigsy went back up to Monkey. Monkey told him that the body was better than gold. So Pigsy dived back down again and brought the body up.

	Monkey looked closely at the body, which had been dead for three years. He asked Pigsy, 'After three years, how can it still look so fresh?'

	'The Dragon King used a magic stone to keep it like that,' Pigsy answered. 'That was a bit of luck,' said Monkey. 'But we must still get his enemy and make him pay for this terrible murder. And we will be thanked for our good work. Quickly, Pigsy, carry the King away.'

	'Where to?' asked Pigsy.

	'To the temple,' said Monkey, 'to show him to Tripitaka.'

	'What an idea!' Pigsy complained to himself. 'I was tricked into doing this job. I do not want to carry this dead body.'

	'Hurry, Pigsy,' said Monkey impatiently.

	'I am not going to carry it,' said Pigsy.

	'If you do not want to be beaten, you will carry it away now,' said Monkey.

	Pigsy feared the cudgel, so he lifted up the dead body and put it on his back.

	'This Monkey,' he said to himself, 'has played a dirty trick on me, but he will be sorry. When we get back to the temple, I will tell Tripitaka that Monkey can bring the dead to life. Monkey will say that he cannot. And I will tell Tripitaka to recite the spell. Monkey's head will hurt, but I will not be happy until his brains shoot out of his head.'

	They took the body back to the temple and showed it to Tripitaka. He told Monkey to bring it back to life.

	'Only Yama, King of Death, can do that,' said Monkey.

	'Don't believe him!' cried Pigsy. 'Just tighten that cap on his head.'

	Poor Monkey! He was soon holding his head in great pain as Tripitaka recited the spell. The cap became tighter and tighter.

	'But Master,' said Monkey, 'what will happen if I fail?'

	'If someone puts a good breath into him, he will be himself again, even after three years under water,' said Tripitaka.

	Pigsy at once offered his breath, but Tripitaka knew that it was not pure. Pigsy had eaten the bodies of humans. So he asked for Monkey, whose food had been only apples and food from the forest. Monkey blew hard into the King's mouth and his soul returned.

	Then they all went back to the city to find the magician who had taken the appearance of the King. When they were led to him, they refused to bow.

	'And who are you?' asked the false king, surprised.

	'My Master,' said Monkey, 'is called Tripitaka and he is like a younger brother to the Emperor of China. I am his main follower.' Then he told the false king about Pigsy and Sandy, but he introduced the true king as a temple servant.

	The false king wanted to know more about this 'temple servant'. He looked at the true king, who was afraid of him, but Monkey whispered, 'It is all right! I will speak for you.'

	Dear Monkey! He stepped forwards and cried to the magician in a loud, clear voice. 'Oh, King, this old man has had some hard times in his life. Five years ago, disaster came to his family when Heaven sent no rain and people died because there was no water. Then from the mountains came a magician who helped the people. But he then destroyed this man's life. He pushed him into a great water hole in the palace and became a false king of the people. But I have returned life to the dead man and he should be king again - not this magician.'

	The magician felt fear deep in his heart. Taking a sword from a soldier, he jumped on a cloud and disappeared.

	Both Sandy and Pigsy were very angry. 'Now we will never be able to find him,' they shouted.

	Dear Monkey! Telling Pigsy and Sandy to take good care of the Prince, the King, his ministers, the Queen and Tripitaka, he suddenly leapt into the clouds. Looking down, he saw the magician running to the North-east. He shouted, 'Where do you think you are going? Monkey has come!'

	'Keep out of my way,' shouted the magician.

	Monkey fought a terrible fight with his cudgel against the magician and his sword, but suddenly the magician escaped back to the city. He transformed himself into someone who looked like Tripitaka. Monkey followed him but did not dare use his cudgel.

	'Which is the real Tripitaka?' he shouted to Pigsy and Sandy.

	'We do not know,' they answered. 'We have no idea.'

	'Master, recite your spell,' called Monkey.

	The real Tripitaka at once recited. Pigsy lifted up his fork as the magician flew up into the air. Dear Pigsy! He chased the magician, with Sandy and Monkey close behind him.

	What a fight there was then, with three wild priests hitting and kicking at one terrible ugly creature again and again. In the end, Monkey leapt above the creature, and he was going to cut him in half with his cudgel when a voice said, 'Monkey, stop the fight.'

	It was the God Manjusri. He had come down from Heaven with a magic mirror which showed demons in their true form.

	'But I do not understand,' said Monkey. 'In this mirror, the magician is a tiger.'

	'Yes,' said Manjusri. 'As a magician, he was acting under Buddha's orders.'

	'What!' cried Monkey. 'The magician is protected by Buddha! How can that be?'

	'Let me explain,' said Manjusri. 'In the beginning, the true king pleased Buddha so much that he sent me to fetch him to the Western Heaven. But I said something to the King that offended him. He told his soldiers to throw me into the river. Then Buddha sent this magician to throw the King into the water hole for three years. But now, with your help, he has been forgiven.'

	'Yes, but the people of the city?' asked Monkey.

	'Nothing has happened to them. During these three years, rain has fallen and there has been peace.'

	'And the Queen, who has slept with him as his wife?'

	'He has not been a husband to her,' was the answer. 'He is not a whole man.'

	'Then take him away,' said Monkey. 'He can thank you for saving him.' Manjusri said a spell, the magician returned to his tiger shape, and the God rode him away over the clouds.

	As the pilgrims travelled further on their journey to the West, they heard a noise that sounded like a thousand voices.

	Dear Monkey! He leapt high into the clouds, looked down, and at a little distance he saw a hill outside a city. There, a great crowd of Buddhist priests were carrying bricks and wood for building. They were hot and tired and crying out to the God of Power to give them strength.

	'They are going to build a temple,' thought Monkey. But suddenly the gates of the city opened and two Taoist priests came out. Monkey saw at once that the Buddhists were afraid of them. He thought, 'This must be the city I have heard about. The religion of Buddha has been destroyed here.'

	Monkey transformed himself into a Taoist magician, walked towards the two young Taoist priests and bowed low.

	'Can a poor Taoist find food in this city?'

	'Oh, yes,' said the priests. 'Even the King is pleased to give food to Taoists. Twenty years ago there was not enough food in this place and it was saved by three Taoist Immortals who came out of the sky. They can bring wind or rain or turn stones into gold.'

	'Your king is lucky to have these Immortals here. I would like to meet him.'

	'That is no problem,' said the priests. 'But first we must count those Buddhists and check that they are working well.'

	'But they are priests, like us! We should not make them work.'

	'Well, when we had no food, the Buddhists prayed to Buddha with no success at all. We Taoists prayed to our gods and we were successful. So they are not really priests and we should really destroy their temples. But now they work for us as builders and cleaners.'

	'Then I cannot meet your masters,' Monkey said, 'because I am looking for an uncle who became a Buddhist priest.'

	'That is no problem,' they replied. 'Take our list and check while we wait here. See if your uncle is among our priests.'

	As Monkey walked towards the priests with the list, they all went down on their knees in front of him.

	'Please don't harm us, Father!' they said. 'We have all worked hard and we have never been ill or missed work.'

	Monkey told them to get up. He said that they did not need to fear him - he was only looking for his uncle.

	Hearing this, they all crowded near him. 'Which of us do you want?' they asked.

	Monkey laughed. 'You are priests!' he said. 'Why do you work as servants instead of reading the Scriptures?'

	'Ah, don't laugh at us,' cried the priests. 'Our King has chosen other masters and we do what they tell us. The three Immortals are very powerful and can perform a lot of magic. Now they are using magic to keep the King young. That is why he obeys them.'

	'Why do you not run away?' asked Monkey.

	'There are pictures of us in every part of the country and there are police everywhere. Many of us have taken our own lives. But the spirits tell us that one day a pilgrim will come and with him is a follower called the Monkey King. He will use his great powers to right wrongs, and he will free us.'

	Monkey went back to the two Taoist priests. They asked him if he had found his relative.

	'They are all relatives of mine,' replied Monkey. 'Two hundred on my father's side and three hundred on my mother's. I would like you to free them.'

	'We cannot do that!' said the priests. 'One or two of them can stop work if they are ill, but all of them? Impossible! You must be mad!'

	'Really?' said Monkey and, taking his cudgel, he killed them where they stood.

	The Buddhists came running. 'Oh, what have you done!' they said. 'The people will say that we killed the priests! You must come to the King at once and explain that you are responsible.'

	'I am not what you think I am,' said Monkey. 'I am the one who has come to free you.'

	'But you are a murderer!' said the Buddhist priests. 'The spirits described the one who will free us. He has a flat head, bright red eyes, a hairy face and no chin.'

	Monkey transformed himself back from a Taoist priest into himself, and the Buddhists bowed in front of him.

	'Now go away from here!' cried Monkey. 'But first I shall give you some protecting magic.'

	Dear Monkey! He pulled out a handful of his hairs, bit them into pieces and gave a small piece to each of the Buddhists.

	'Put this behind your ear. If you are in any danger, press your ear and call out "Monkey King!" I will come at once to help you, even if I am thousands of kilometres away.'

	Some of the braver priests tested the hairs and called out 'Monkey King!' At once a thunder god with a great cudgel appeared. 'If you say "Quiet", he will disappear,' Monkey told them. And at the word 'Quiet', he disappeared.

	'Don't go far from this place and there will be news for you soon,' Monkey called as the priests departed. He left to tell Tripitaka what had happened.

	As the pilgrims entered the city, some people were afraid of them. But an old Buddhist priest recognised Monkey and shouted, 'I have dreamt of you, Monkey King. Thanks to you, we are not ghosts - we are living men.'

	That night, Monkey's head was so full of plans for the next day that he could not sleep. He got up, looked down into the street and saw that the Taoists were all celebrating in the temple. They were led by the three Immortals.

	At once, Monkey went to find Pigsy and Sandy. 'Come and have some fun,' he whispered in Sandy's ear.

	'Who wants fun in the middle of the night?' said Sandy, sleepily.

	'The Taoist Temple has plenty of food in it,' said Monkey. 'Bread, cake, fruit, sweets...'

	Pigsy woke up at the sound of a list of food. 'Brother, I am coming too,' he cried.

	When they arrived at the temple, Pigsy could not wait. 'They are all still praying!' he complained.

	'I will soon stop that,' said Monkey, and he blew hard. A great wind passed through the temple, blowing everything on to the ground and putting all the lights out. Frightened in the dark, all the Taoists ran away.

	The three pilgrims went inside and the three of them finished all the food.

	But a little Taoist remembered that he had left his hand-bell in the temple and went back for it. He opened the door and saw that all the food was gone. He ran away to fetch the three Immortals.

	When they came, one of them thought that their gods had eaten the food.

	'Let's pray to them,' the Immortal said, 'for long life for the King.'

	Then Monkey jumped out and called to them. 'How could you be such fools?' he said. 'We are not gods, we are priests from China. We have eaten all your food and your king will have to go somewhere else for a long life.'

	The Taoist Immortals attacked the pilgrims, but Monkey took Sandy in one hand and Pigsy in the other and leapt on to a cloud with them. In no time, they were back in their beds, in the hotel where they were staying with Tripitaka.

	Next day, the King was very angry when he heard that three Buddhist pilgrims wanted to see him. But one of his ministers stepped forward.

	'The country of T'ang is fifty thousand kilometres away,' he said. 'If they really come from there, they must have magic powers. Let's hear them.'

	So the King allowed the pilgrims to come in, but before they could speak, three important Taoists came in and made a report to the King.

	'Yesterday,' they said, 'these three killed two of our followers and helped five hundred Buddhist priests to escape. That night, they went into our temple and ate all the food.'

	The angry King ordered the immediate death of the three pilgrims. But before anyone could do anything about the order, some men arrived asking urgently for rain. The King thought about the pilgrims' magic powers.

	'There will be a rain-making competition between you and the Immortals,' he said to the pilgrims. 'If you win, you will go free. If you lose, you will die!'

	A tower was quickly built and the King, the pilgrims and the Immortals went outside.

	'You must say what you are going to pray for,' said Monkey to an Immortal. 'How else will we know if you are successful?'

	When the King heard Monkey's words, he said, 'This little priest is a sensible Monkey.'

	'There is no need to tell you,' said the Immortal. 'The King knows what I am going to do.'

	'That is not what I mean. We must each have our programme. If we do not, we will get confused.'

	'Yes, fine. I shall cry out four times,' said the Immortal. 'At the first cry, wind will come; at the second, clouds will appear in the sky; at the third, you will hear thunder; at the fourth, rain will fall. But I shall cry out once more and the rain will stop.'

	'Please begin,' said Monkey. 'This will be very entertaining for us.'

	The tower was ten metres high. On each side there were the twenty-eight flags of the Great House of the Moon. There was a long table with burners on it, which gave a sweet-smelling smoke. There was a metal plate with the name of the thunder-spirit written on it next to each burner. At the foot of the table there were five great bowls of clear water with flowers in them. Behind the tower were some Taoists writing down religious teachings.

	The Immortal went to the tower and climbed to the top. With his sword in his hand, he recited spells, and a strong wind was heard and felt in the air above.

	'That is bad,' whispered Pigsy. 'He is winning.'

	'Quiet, Brother,' whispered Monkey, 'and leave it to me.'

	Dear Monkey! He leapt into the air and cried, 'Who is in charge of the wind?'

	At once, the Old Woman of the Wind appeared.

	'I am protecting Tripitaka on his way to India,' said Monkey. 'We are having a rain-making competition with the Immortals here. Why are you helping them instead of us? Stop that wind!' cried Monkey, and immediately the wind stopped.

	The Immortal now hit the tower hard and the sky filled with clouds.

	'Who is in charge of the clouds?' cried Monkey, and the Cloud Boy appeared in front of him. 'Stop the clouds!' he commanded, and again the sky became clear.

	The Immortal loosened his hair and then knocked again on the tower. The Thunder God and the Mother of Lightning appeared in the sky, but they bowed towards Monkey.

	'The Jade Emperor in Heaven,' they said, 'ordered us to make a storm.'

	'You are allowed to do that,' said Monkey, 'but not yet.'

	As there was no thunder and no lightning, the Immortal was confused as well as angry.

	'Listen well,' said Monkey, up in the sky. 'Here are my orders. When I point my cudgel upwards once, you will give me wind. Twice, and you will give me clouds. Three times, thunder and lightning. And four times, rain. 'And when I point it a fifth time, you will stop the storm.'

	The Immortal sadly left the tower and went to speak to the King.

	'I have been watching,' said the King. 'You have not produced either wind or rain. What is wrong?'

	'The rain-dragons are not at home today,' said the Immortal.

	'Don't believe him!' cried Monkey. 'They are all at home. That Immortal has no real power over them. We, the followers of Buddha, will soon put them to work. You will see!'

	'Go to the tower,' said the King to Monkey. 'I will wait here and see if there is any rain.'

	'I need your help too,' said Monkey to Tripitaka. 'Go quietly to the tower and start reciting your Scriptures.'

	'My dear friend,' said Tripitaka, 'I do not know anything about making rain!'

	'Don't let him pull you into this,' whispered Pigsy to Tripitaka. 'He will blame you if no rain comes.'

	'It is true that you do not know how to make rain,' said Monkey to Tripitaka. 'But you know how to recite the Scriptures. If you do that, I will do the rest.'

	Tripitaka went up the tower, sat down and began silently reciting. Then Monkey took his cudgel from behind his ear, and made it bigger until it was nearly a metre long. He pointed it towards the sky.

	The Old Woman of the Wind brought out her bag and when she opened it, a great wind rushed out of it. It blew through the city, lifting stones and rocks high into the air. Monkey pointed again and a black cloud covered the sky, so the people of the city could not even see their palace. He pointed again and loud thunder shook the Earth. When he pointed a fourth time, rain fell down until it seemed that the Yellow River had fallen out of the sky. In seconds, the whole city was under water.

	The people of the city were filled with terror and they all began saying their prayers. The rain fell from early morning until midday.

	'Enough!' cried the King. 'Stop the rain or nothing will grow this year!'

	Monkey at once pointed a fifth time with his cudgel and the storm stopped. There was not even a cloud in the sky.

	'Wonderful priests!' cried the happy King. 'So it is true! There is always a stronger magic than the strongest! In the past we have seen our Immortals bring rain successfully. But even they could not stop it suddenly. Light rain always continued for the rest of the day. But these priests stopped the rain completely!'

	The Immortal began making excuses.

	'You said that the rain-dragons were not at home,' the King said, 'and that made it impossible to get rain. But look! The Buddhists, in their quiet way, made the rain fall. They were successful, not you.'

	Again, the Immortal tried to change the King's mind, but Monkey jumped in front of him and spoke to the King.

	'Sir, the Dragon Kings made the wind, the clouds and the rain. They are still in the sky, so would you like to see them?'

	'Of course!' cried the King. 'I have been king for a long time, but I have never seen a dragon. I will reward anyone who can show me one. But if you do not produce a dragon, you will be punished.'

	The Taoists knew quite well that this was beyond their powers. They tried, but no dragon answered their call. Then it was Monkey's turn.

	'Are you there?' Monkey called up into the sky. 'Let's have a look at you and your brothers.'

	When the four Dragon Kings immediately appeared through the clouds, the King began to burn sweet-smelling sticks. His ministers went down on their knees in front of them.

	'I feel ashamed,' said the King. 'I have troubled them for no reason. Tell them that I do not want to trouble them anymore. I will find an opportunity to repay them soon with offerings.'

	'Spirits, you can leave us now,' said Monkey. 'The King will repay you with offerings at the earliest opportunity.'

	The Dragons flew off, each to his own ocean, and again the sky was clear.

	The King gave orders for a banquet the next day, to thank the pilgrims. All the Buddhists were invited to return to the city, and they were welcomed to the banquet by the King himself.

	After the banquet, the Buddhist priests took the pilgrims to the gates of the city, and they gave Monkey back the hairs he had given them. Then Monkey said, 'Now you can see that Buddhism is the True Way, but you must obey all priests - Taoist priests too - and become better men. Then these hills and streams will be safe forever.'

	The King himself rode out with the pilgrims far beyond the city's walls, where they said goodbye.



	CHAPTER five

	The River to Heaven

	'What has happened to Tripitaka?' shouted Monkey from the air.

	'There is no Tripitaka now!' Pigsy shouted back.

	They travelled without stopping for many days. Then Tripitaka stopped his horse and said to Monkey, 'Follower, when and where are we going to rest?'

	'Comfort,' answered Monkey, 'is for ordinary people, so pilgrims cannot expect it. By day or by night, in wet or dry weather, if there is a road to travel, we must continue.'

	Soon Sandy shouted, 'There is a great river in front of us!'

	'Wait here!' cried Monkey, leaping high into the air. Soon he was back. 'I cannot see land on the other side,' he said, 'but I thought I saw a fisherman. He was standing at the water's edge. I will ask him about the river.'

	But it was not a fisherman that Monkey had seen. It was a sign that said: The River That Leads to Heaven. Few people have reached the other side.

	When Tripitaka read this, he cried quietly. 'I knew so little of the difficulties in our way, on the road to India,' he said.

	'Listen,' said Pigsy. 'That music means there are priests praying somewhere near here. They will tell us how we can get across the river.'

	Following the sound, they soon saw a village of several hundred houses. One of them had a flag at its gate and lights outside.

	'I shall go in first,' said Tripitaka, 'because you three look a little strange and I do not want people to be frightened.'

	An old man came to the door and when he saw Tripitaka he said, 'You have come a little late. The banquet is almost finished and there is not much to eat.'

	'I did not come for the banquet,' answered Tripitaka. 'I have come from China and I would like a bed for the night if that is possible.'

	'China is a very long way away,' said the old man, whose name was Ch'en. 'How do I know that your words are true?'

	'My three followers have helped me on the journey. They have made it possible for me to travel so far.'

	'Well, they had better come in with you.'

	The three pilgrims came rushing in out of the dark, leading the white horse, carrying the luggage and shouting. The old man fell on the floor, crying, 'Demons! Help! Demons!'

	'Not demons,' said Tripitaka, 'but my followers. I know they are ugly, but they are very good at fighting tigers, dragons and other creatures.'

	A group of praying priests jumped up and ran away in fear. The pilgrims laughed so loudly at this that the priests ran even faster.

	'You fools!' cried Tripitaka to his followers. 'I have tried so hard to teach you to behave correctly! Learn this: It is admirable to be good without being taught. It is normal to be good after being taught. Only a fool is taught and then is still bad. Do you not understand that I will have to take the blame for this?'

	The three stood silently, so the old man believed that they really were followers of Tripitaka. He sat Tripitaka in the best place at the table, and food was brought for them all. Tripitaka began to recite the Scripture Before Eating, but Pigsy poured all the food into his mouth from the bowl before Tripitaka had finished.

	As Pigsy was calling 'More food, more food' to the servants, the old man spoke to Tripitaka. 'Did you read the sign by the river? You were quite near the Temple of the Great King of Magic,' he said. 'He is the god who sends us rain. He makes things grow.' But as he spoke, he began to cry loudly.

	'Why are you crying when you speak of the God?' asked Monkey.

	'That god is an angry god and every year he takes the life of a boy and a girl, so we have few children here. I have one child, a son called War Boy, and my brother has one girl, called Much Gold. This year our family must give the children to the God and both of them must die.'

	'Let me see the boy,' said Monkey.

	The boy was brought down from his bed and ran around eating fruit. Without a word, Monkey transformed himself into a boy who looked exactly the same.

	'That is unbelievable,' cried the father. 'Look! When I call, both come running to me.'

	Monkey then changed back to his own form. 'I am going to save this child's life,' he said to the father. 'I will let the Great King of Magic kill me for the gods.'

	The old man's brother was standing in the doorway, watching and crying.

	'I think you are worried about your daughter,' said Monkey.

	'Father,' said the old man, 'I cannot lose her. She is my only child. Who will cry for me when I die?'

	Monkey pointed at Pigsy. 'If you feed that long-nosed brother of mine enough,' he said, 'he will transform himself into your girl and do anything else you ask. The Great King of Magic can kill us both together.'

	Pigsy was shocked. 'Leave me out of this!' he said.

	'You know what they say,' said Monkey. "'Even a chicken must work for its food.'"

	'I am no good at transformations,' complained Pigsy. 'I can change into a mountain or a tree, but it is much more difficult to change into a small girl.'

	'Don't believe him,' said Monkey to the girl's father. 'Bring your child.'

	Soon the man returned with his child, and all the priests and servants asked Pigsy to save her.

	'Here she is,' said Monkey. 'Have a look and be quick.'

	The fool Pigsy shook his head, said a spell and cried 'Change!' His head was now the same as the child's but his big stomach had not changed.

	'You can hit me if you like,' complained Pigsy, 'but I cannot do any better than that.'

	'I can see that I will have to help,' said Monkey. And he blew on Pigsy, who was soon like the child from head to foot.

	'What happens now?' asked Monkey. 'How are we brought to the God?'

	The girl's father came forward. 'It is quite simple,' he said. 'You sit in two dishes, two men carry you to the temple, and then the Great King of Magic eats you.'

	'Watch me,' Monkey said to Pigsy. 'While he is cutting me into pieces, you can run away.'

	'But he might begin with the girl!' cried Pigsy.

	'No,' said War Boy's father quietly. 'The meal always begins with the boy.'

	'Well, that is lucky,' said Pigsy.

	Suddenly, they all saw lights outside and heard the sound of voices as the gate opened. A loud voice cried, 'Bring out the boy and the girl!'

	The two fathers cried while the Great King's servants carried the boy and the girl away.

	'Great King,' said the villagers, when everything was ready, 'we now offer you a boy child, War Boy, and a girl child, Much Gold, with a pig, a sheep and some wine.' They then went back to their homes.

	'I think I will go home too,' said Pigsy.

	'You have no home,' said Monkey. 'What rubbish you talk! We have started this job and now we have to finish it.'

	Just then, a strong wind blew through the door, and as it opened the Great King appeared. He was a horrible creature, with eyes like fire and teeth like a pig.

	'Which family do you come from?' asked the Great King.

	'The family of Ch'en,' answered Monkey.

	The King did not understand why the boy was so brave. Usually the children were too frightened to talk before they were killed.

	'You understand that I am now going to eat you?'

	'Do it!' said Monkey.

	'You are too brave,' said the Great King. 'This time I shall begin with the girl.'

	'No, no!' said Pigsy. 'It is never a good idea to change an old custom. Do what you usually do - that is always best.'

	The fool leapt off his dish, changed back into Pigsy, took his fork and hit the Great King. Then he and Monkey leapt into the air, just as the Great King changed into a wind and disappeared into the river.

	'Oh, let him go now,' said Monkey. 'We will finish him tomorrow and get our Master across the river.'

	So they returned to Ch'en's farm, where they were soon asleep in the best room in the house.

	But under the river, the Great King was unhappy. He told his fish-servants what had happened. He told them about Tripitaka, who was like a god. If somebody ate him, they would never die.

	The Great King's fish-sister made a suggestion. 'Start a cold wind and a great fall of snow, so the river freezes. Then some of us will change into human form and walk across it, carrying luggage. Tripitaka is in such a hurry to get to India that he will walk across it too. When you hear him above you, heat the ice. The pilgrims will fall through it and you will have them all.'

	Just before the sun came up, Tripitaka and his followers began to feel cold. 'Pilgrims,' said Monkey, 'should not feel either heat or cold.'

	But they could not sleep, and when they looked out of the window everything was white. The snow was so lovely that they sat and watched it fall. It was like small pieces of white jade.

	Soon servants brought them hot water to wash in, hot tea to drink and hot food to eat. They even brought heaters for the rooms, but when the meal was finished the pilgrims were colder than ever. By now there was nearly a metre of snow outside and, seeing this, Tripitaka began to cry.

	But towards evening everyone was talking about the river. It had frozen and people were walking on the ice. The next morning the ice was even thicker and Tripitaka gave thanks to the Gods for this chance to walk across the river.

	'Master,' said Sandy, 'should we not wait until the ice goes away? Then we can go across the river in Mr Ch'en's boat.'

	'But if we wait until the spring,' said Tripitaka, 'we will lose half a year's travelling. I promised the Goddess Kuan-yin that the journey would take three years. Already seven have passed.'

	He ordered Pigsy to put the luggage on the horse, and they left.

	When they had gone fifteen or twenty kilometres across the ice, Pigsy showed Tripitaka how to carry his stick across his body.

	'Ice often has holes in it,' he explained. 'If you put your foot in a hole, you will go down into the water. It will close above you and you will never get out again. Carry your stick across your body and you will feel safer.'

	Monkey looked disbelieving, but they all did as Pigsy had said.

	They rode all night until the sun began to come up. Then they stopped to eat some food from their luggage and then continued towards the West.

	But after some time, the ice began to break and the white horse almost fell. They continued walking, not knowing that the Great King and his fish-followers were waiting below. Suddenly, a great hole opened in the ice. Monkey at once leapt high into the air, but the white horse and all the others fell through it. The Great King took Tripitaka and carried him down to the Great Palace under the water.

	'Where is my fish-sister?' said the Great King. 'Come, fetch the sharp knives. Let's eat Tripitaka and live forever.'

	'Great King,' answered the Fish-Sister. 'Let's wait for a couple of days until we can be sure that his followers cannot spoil our fun.'

	The King agreed, and Tripitaka was put in a great stone box at the back of the palace.

	At the same time, Pigsy and Sandy had managed to get the luggage out of the water and put it on to the horse's back. They started swimming back the way they had come.

	'What has happened to Tripitaka?' shouted Monkey from the air.

	'There is no Tripitaka now!' Pigsy shouted back. 'We are going back to Ch'en's farm.'

	Mr Ch'en cried uncontrollably when he heard what had happened to Tripitaka.

	'Don't worry,' said Monkey. 'I think the Master will live for a long time. Let's dry our clothes and then we will go back and finish that creature!'

	Back at the river, Monkey asked Pigsy to carry him down while Sandy swam behind them. And at the bottom of the river they found a gate with the sign Turtle House written on it.

	Monkey whispered, 'You two hide at each side of the door!' Then he changed himself into a fish and swam inside. The Great King and his fish-followers were talking about eating Tripitaka, but Monkey could not see his Master. Then he heard Tripitaka crying inside a stone box.

	'Don't worry,' said Monkey, 'we will soon get you out.'

	'Be quick! Oh, be quick!' cried Tripitaka from inside his box.

	'I am going now,' said Monkey, 'but I shall return.' And soon he and Pigsy and Sandy were back at the riverbank.

	'I am not at my best in the water, so it is not a good plan for me to go down again and fight the Great King,' said Monkey. 'I shall go to the Goddess of the Southern Ocean for help. I shall not waste a minute.'

	Dear Monkey! He shot up in the air on a magic light, leapt on a cloud and found Kuan-yin. She was expecting him, but had not finished getting dressed.

	'Let's leave now,' she said, when she saw Monkey. 'We will go and save Tripitaka.'

	Monkey went down on his knees in front of her. 'Do you not want to finish dressing first?' he asked.

	'It is too much trouble,' she answered. 'I am going like this.'

	She left on her cloud, followed by Monkey.

	'Well, that was quick!' said Pigsy, as they appeared. 'You did well to get a goddess to come immediately, before she had even finished combing her hair!'

	The Goddess sailed low over the river like a cloud. Untying the belt from her dress, she tied a basket to it and pulled the basket through the water. She repeated the words, 'The dead go, the living stay,' seven times and pulled the basket up. There was a gold fish in it. Its tail moved and its eye stared.

	'Go at once into the water and fetch your Master,' said the Goddess to Monkey.

	'But what shall I do with the Great King?' asked Monkey.

	'The Great King is in the basket,' said the Goddess. 'He used to live in a little pool in my garden. Every day he used to put his head out and listen to the Scriptures, until at last he held great magical powers. But one day there was a great storm and the water took him far out to sea. I thought that he might be using his magic against your Master. So without stopping to comb my hair, I made this magic basket to catch him in.'

	'If you want to make humans believe in the Gods,' said Monkey, 'you will wait here. I will call the people of the village to hear this story and look at your golden face.'

	So men and women, young and old, were soon hurrying to the river to go down on their knees in front of the Goddess. One of them later painted a famous painting called Kuan-yin with the Fish Basket.

	When the Goddess had returned to the Southern Ocean, Pigsy and Sandy dived down to the Great King's palace. All the Great King's fish-followers were dead, so they soon helped Tripitaka out of the stone box and took him back to Ch'en's farm.

	'We are sorry, Sirs,' said the Ch'en brothers, 'that you had so many problems.'

	'Oh, that is all finished now,' said Monkey. 'The important thing is that next year, and every other year, your village will not lose its children. But we would be glad if you could give us a boat to carry us across the river.'

	All the villagers started to make boats. But when the pilgrims went back to the river, they heard a voice: 'Oh, great Monkey King, you do not need to build a boat. I will take you.' And above the waters they saw the white head and the enormous body of a turtle.

	'You!' cried Monkey. 'You demon! If you come near us, I will kill you with my cudgel.'

	'Great Monkey King,' said the turtle,

	'listen to me. I am not a follower of the Great King. His palace below the river used to be mine. Then one day that creature came swimming into the river killed many of my family and made the others work for him. I am grateful for all that you have done - you have made us free again.'

	'Promise me and promise the Gods that this is all true,' said Monkey.

	The turtle opened his red mouth wide. 'I promise you and all the Gods.

	If I do not take Tripitaka safely across the river, my bones will turn to water.'

	The turtle came out of the river, and people saw that his back was fifteen metres wide.

	'Climb on the turtle's back,' called Monkey to the others. 'He has promised that we will be safe. When creatures speak human language, their words are usually true.'

	The white horse was led to the middle of the turtle's back. Tripitaka stood to the left, Sandy to the right, and Pigsy behind the horse's tail. Monkey put himself in front of the horse's head.

	'Now, turtle,' he cried. 'Go gently, because if you do not, there will be a cudgel on your head!'

	With this warning, the turtle moved smoothly over the water. As the pilgrims left, all the people of the village bowed and thanked Buddha.

	The turtle travelled quickly, and in less than a day they had arrived at the other side.

	Tripitaka said to the turtle, 'I have nothing that I can give you. But I would like to thank you for taking us across the river.'

	'Master,' replied the turtle, 'there is something that you could do for me. I have been trying to become perfect for about a thousand years, and that is a long time. I can now use human speech, but I am still a turtle. Please ask the Buddha if I can become a human.'

	Tripitaka gladly promised to ask Buddha the question, and the turtle swam back to his home in the river.

	Again Pigsy carried the luggage, and Monkey helped Tripitaka on to the white horse. With Sandy behind them, they soon found the road to the West.

	They travelled for many months. The country was very different from anything they had seen before. The flowers were like jewels, the grass looked magical and there were strange and wonderful trees.

	In every village, families were entertaining priests. On every hill, Immortals were practising control over their bodies. In every wood, pilgrims were reciting and singing.

	Every night, they found somewhere to stay and left again at the first light of day. They travelled on in this way for many more days until suddenly the light grew bright and they saw a wonderful castle.

	'Monkey,' said Tripitaka admiringly, pointing at it, 'that's a fine place!'

	'Do you remember,' said Monkey, 'how often on our journey you have bowed in front of the caves and hiding-places and palaces of false magicians? It is strange that you do not even get off your horse now - when you see the Buddha's holy castle!'

	So Tripitaka, in great excitement, jumped down from his horse. When they reached the gates, a young priest came out to greet them.

	He asked, 'Are you the pilgrims who have come from the East for the Scriptures?'

	The boy was dressed in beautiful clothes and carried a bowl of jade dust in his hand. Monkey knew him at once, and turned to Tripitaka.

	'This,' he said, 'is the Golden-Headed Immortal of the Jade Temple at the foot of the Holy Mountain.'

	'Here you are at last!' said the Golden-Headed Immortal. 'It is now ten years since the Goddess Kuan-yin told me to expect your arrival. Year after year I have waited, but there has been no sign!'

	'Great Immortal,' said Tripitaka, bowing low, 'I cannot thank you enough for your patience.'

	Inside the temple, sweet-smelling hot water was brought to wash in, and after supper the pilgrims were shown to their beds.

	Early the next day, Tripitaka put on his finest clothes and jewellery and greeted the young Immortal.

	'That is better,' said the young Immortal. 'Yesterday you looked rather untidy, but today you look like a true child of Buddha! You must let me show you the way. Monkey knows it, but only by air, and you must travel on the ground.'

	Taking Tripitaka by the hand, he led the pilgrims through the temple gardens to the back of the building and up a path to the hill behind.

	'Do you see that mountain in front of you?' said the young Immortal, pointing up. 'That is where Buddha has his home. I shall now turn back.'

	Tripitaka at once began bowing low, hitting his head on the holy ground.

	'If you are going to do that all the way up,' said Monkey, 'there will not be much of your head left by the time we get there!'

	So Tripitaka stopped bowing and they climbed some way, walking easily. Then they came to a fast-moving river with rough water.

	Tripitaka said, 'This cannot be the way.' But then he saw a bridge and a sign which said Cloud Reach Bridge. When they came to the bridge, they saw that it was just some trees laid end to end. It was only a little wider than a man's hand.

	'Monkey!' cried Tripitaka, afraid. 'I cannot walk across that!'

	'Yes, yes, people walk across it to get to the Buddha. Wait while I show you how!'

	Dear Monkey! He walked confidently up to the bridge, leapt lightly on to it and was soon waving from the other side.

	'Follow me!' he shouted back.

	But Pigsy and Sandy repeated to themselves, 'It cannot be done.' Tripitaka did not move at all.

	Monkey leapt back again and started pulling at Pigsy. 'Fool, follow me across!' But Pigsy lay flat on the ground and refused to move.

	'If you do not come, how will you ever become a Buddha?' said Monkey.

	'Buddha or no Buddha,' answered Pigsy, 'I will not go on that bridge!'

	As they all started arguing, a boatman appeared with a boat. He was shouting, 'Who wants to cross the river?' But when the boat came nearer, they saw that it had no bottom.

	Monkey, with his sharp eyesight, had recognised the boatman as the Bringer of Souls, but he did not tell the others.

	'How can you take people across a river in a bottomless boat?' asked Tripitaka.

	'Many pilgrims ask me that,' he answered. 'But since the beginning of time I have carried too many souls to count.'

	'Get in the boat, Master,' said Monkey. 'You will find that it will carry you quite easily and pleasantly.'

	But Tripitaka still did not get in, so Monkey pushed him into the boat and Tripitaka immediately fell out into the water. The boatman caught him and pulled him in again. He sat there, unhappily squeezing the water out of his clothes and complaining to Monkey, who had more important things to think about.

	Monkey put Pigsy, Sandy and the white horse on the side of the boat with Tripitaka.

	The boat left and the boatman had taken them some way down the river when they saw a body in the water. Tripitaka looked very frightened.

	Monkey laughed. 'Don't be frightened, Master,' he said. 'That is you.'

	And Pigsy cried, 'It is you, it is you!'

	The boatman said the same words to Tripitaka, adding, 'There you go! Congratulations!'

	Safe on the other side of the river, Tripitaka stepped out of the boat. His earthly body was gone now, gone into the river, and all the foolishness of his early years was washed away. He now had the highest wisdom, the Wisdom of the Far Side of the River, and there is no end to that wisdom.

	Before they could thank him, the boatman and his boat had disappeared, and now Monkey explained who the boatman was. Tripitaka began thanking his followers for all they had done for him, but Monkey interrupted.

	'We should all give thanks to each other,' he said. 'This journey was too difficult for one man alone, and without all of us the Master could not lose his human body.'

	With a strange feeling of lightness and great happiness, they went up the Holy Mountain. Near the top, Immortals greeted the pilgrims and then they were met by the Keeper of Metal, Wood, Water, Fire and Earth.

	'So you are here at last, Great Priest,' he smiled.

	'Your follower Hsuan Tsang, the priest Tripitaka, has finally arrived,' said Tripitaka, bowing.

	The Great Buddha was very pleased at the news and ordered all the Gods to come to him. Then his command was shouted for everyone to hear: 'The priest of Tsang must be brought in.'

	Tripitaka, Monkey, Pigsy and Sandy all went in, followed by the white horse and the luggage. In the Great Hall they first lay flat in front of Buddha, then bowed to the right and to the left.

	Then Tripitaka said, 'The follower of Buddha, Hsuan Tsang, has come by order of the Emperor of the great land of T'ang to fetch the True Scriptures. They will save all the people of the world. I ask the Great Buddha for these Scriptures and also to allow me a quick return to my own country.'

	Then the Great Buddha said these words: 'In all your great Eastern Land there is killing and lying; there are bad thoughts and bad actions. But I have three baskets of Scriptures that can save the people. One contains the Law, which tells of Heaven. One contains the Lessons, which tell of Earth. One contains the Scriptures, which save the Dead. They are written in fifteen thousand one hundred and forty-four books. They are the Path to Perfection, the gate that leads to True Good. In them you can learn everything about men, birds, animals, flowers, trees, stars and Earth. I would like to give them all to you. But the people of China are too foolish to understand them. So a few books from each basket will be given to these priests to take back to the East.'

	The pilgrims were taken to a lower room and shown the books from each basket. Then they were given food of a beauty and taste that was unknown on Earth. When they had finished eating, two followers of Buddha took them to a special room down some stairs. The door was opened and a magic light filled the room. On the many beautiful jewelled boxes were written the names of the holy books. The two followers of Buddha led Tripitaka to the place where the Scriptures lay. After inviting him to study the titles, they asked Tripitaka to show them the gifts he had brought for them. They planned to give him the Scriptures in return.

	'I have brought nothing at all for you,' said Tripitaka. 'On my journey I have sometimes received gifts, but nobody has ever asked for gifts in return.'

	And Monkey, hearing these words, shouted angrily, 'Come with me, Master! We will see what Buddha says about this!'

	One of the two followers said quickly, 'There is no need to shout. Come here and fetch your Scriptures.'

	The pilgrims hid their anger, put the Scriptures on the horse's back and bowed to Buddha's followers. Then they left, down the mountain.

	The Buddha of the Past was sitting in an upper room and had heard everything the two followers had said. He was sure they had given the pilgrims Scriptures with nothing written on them because they had received no gifts. So he sent a messenger after the pilgrims and, of course, the Buddha of the Past was correct. When the pilgrims opened the Scriptures, they saw only white pages.

	Tripitaka cried, 'How can I go back to the Emperor of T'ang with these? He will think I am laughing at him. He will order my death.'

	'I know the reason for this. Those two followers did not get any gifts, so you did not get any Scriptures! We will have to go back to Buddha,' said Monkey. They went back at once.

	'Listen to this!' shouted Monkey to Buddha. 'They have given us white pages with no words on them because we did not bring them gifts.'

	'You need not shout,' said Buddha, smiling. 'I have sometimes thought that perhaps it should not be too easy to get the Scriptures. My two followers expected a gift because of a bad experience they had. Not long ago, I gave them permission to go down the mountain with some Scriptures. After letting Chao read a few Scriptures to his people, my followers were given only some rice in return. The result of hearing these Scriptures was that his people were protected from all their enemies. Afterwards I told my two followers that they had sold the Scriptures too cheaply. So, you see, they are not to blame. In fact, these white pages are the True Scriptures. But the people of China are not very clever, so they cannot understand such things. You had better have some scriptures with writing on them.'

	This time Tripitaka offered the two Buddhist followers the only gift he could think of - his golden bowl. He had received this bowl from the Emperor of China, who told him to use it for collecting money from kind people on his journey. The followers accepted the gift, but many of the Gods laughed because it was such a small present.

	As they started to leave again, the Goddess Kuan-yin appeared in front of Buddha. 'I found this man for you and he has now fetched the Scriptures. It took him five thousand and forty days. The number of chapters in the Scriptures is five thousand and forty-eight. Please allow him to make the return journey in eight days. Then the numbers will be the same.'

	'That is a good idea,' said Buddha. 'I will make sure that it is done.'

	Buddha then sent for eight of his messengers and said to them, 'Use your magic powers and carry Tripitaka back to the East. When he has left the Scriptures, bring him back here. All of this must be done in eight days.

	Buddha's messengers went immediately to put Tripitaka and the pilgrims on a magic cloud. And as the pilgrims flew away, they had little idea of what was going to happen next.



	Chapter six

	The End of the Journey

	'Hey!' said Pigsy. 'You have just made the others Buddhas. Why am I not a Buddha too?'

	Many Protectors had watched over Tripitaka and his followers on their frightening but wonderful journey to the West. Now the Protectors appeared to Kuan-yin.

	'We wish to report that we have followed your holy orders. And, without his knowledge, we have protected the young Priest of T'ang on his journey to the West.'

	'I would like to know,' said the Goddess, 'how the pilgrims behaved on their journey.'

	'They were brave, they never gave up, and they never forgot the importance of their work. They had many problems along the way - too many to tell. But we have a record of the most difficult fights.'

	The Protectors then read to the Goddess Kuan-yin a list of all the fights that the pilgrims had fought. They had fought on their journey against animals, humans and spirits.

	Kuan-yin read the list slowly and carefully: 'Tripitaka falls into a hole and is attacked by a tiger, but is saved by his follower Monkey...' She finished with Tripitaka losing his human body when he stepped into the bottomless boat.

	'In our religion, nine times nine is a very important number. You have listed eighty fights,' said the Goddess. 'That is one short of the holy number of eighty-one. There has to be one more fight, so please arrange it.'

	When the Goddess had spoken, the Protectors immediately stopped the magic wind that was carrying the pilgrims through space. Suddenly, and without any warning, the horse, the Scriptures, the Master, Monkey, Sandy and Pigsy all fell down to Earth.

	Tripitaka looked very surprised to find himself standing on the ground instead of flying through the air.

	Pigsy laughed and laughed. 'Well, you never know what is going to happen next, do you?' he said. 'One minute we are rushing at great speed; the next minute we have both feet on the ground.'

	Sandy said, 'I think that it was very thoughtful of them. They probably thought we would like a rest.'

	'Well,' said Monkey, 'if you sit without moving for ten days, then surely you will speed down nine waterfalls in one day.'

	'That is enough rubbish!' said Tripitaka. 'Will you please try to find out where we are.'

	'I know, I know,' said Sandy, looking around. 'Listen to that sound of water.'

	'It makes Sandy feel at home,' said Monkey.

	'It must be...' Pigsy started to say, but Sandy interrupted him.

	'It is the River That Leads to Heaven and this is the western riverbank,' Sandy said.

	'I recognise it now,' said Tripitaka. 'On the other side is Mr Ch'en's farm, where you saved the boy and the girl from the Great King. They were very grateful to us and wanted to build a boat for us. In the end, the turtle carried us across. I remember that on this side there are no houses at all. How are we going to manage this time?'

	'A trick like this from humans is to be expected,' said Pigsy. 'But not from Buddha's own followers. Buddha told them to take us straight back to China. What do they mean by dropping us in the middle of the journey? They have left us in a difficult situation.'

	'I do not know what you two are complaining about,' said Sandy. 'The Master is not a common mortal now. We saw his earthly body go past us down the Cloud River. He will not sink into the water this time. With all three of us to help him, he will surely be able to get across.'

	Monkey smiled to himself. 'It is not going to be as easy as that,' he said.

	Why did Monkey say that it was not going to be easy? They had enough magic power to cross a thousand rivers! But Monkey knew that the number 'nine times nine' had not yet been reached. He knew that Buddha expected one more fight.

	They walked along slowly, wondering what to do. Suddenly, they heard a voice saying, 'Priest of T'ang, Priest of T'ang, come over here.'

	As there was nobody on land and no boat on the river, they were very surprised. But suddenly a large white head appeared in the water.

	'Well,' called the turtle, 'I have been waiting for you all this time.'

	'We are very glad to meet you,' said Monkey. 'Come a little closer.'

	Once again, the turtle came out of the river. Monkey led the white horse and then the pilgrims, carrying their luggage, on to its back. Pigsy sat behind its tail, Tripitaka stood on one side of its head and Sandy on the other. Monkey stood with one foot on its neck and the other on its head.

	Monkey cried, 'Time to go, Old Turtle! Go gently!' And the turtle swam easily through the endless waters until evening came.

	But when they were nearly at the far side, the turtle suddenly asked Tripitaka an important question. 'When I took you across last time, I asked you to find out from Buddha how long I have to wait before I become a human. Did you remember to ask Buddha?'

	Unfortunately, Tripitaka had been so busy with his own problems - losing his mortal body, going up the mountain, meeting Buddha and all his followers, taking the Scriptures - that he had had no time to think of anything else.

	Tripitaka did not want to tell a lie but he did not know what to say.

	When no answer came, the turtle knew that he had not asked. It was very annoyed. The turtle did not think it had asked for much. And it was true, it had not.

	'You have broken your promise!' said the turtle. Without another word, it dived deep down into the water, leaving the four pilgrims, the horse and the holy Scriptures in the river.

	But there was some good fortune in their misfortune. First, Tripitaka was now immortal and could not die under water. Second, the white horse was really a dragon and could swim very well. Third, Pigsy and Sandy were both perfectly happy in the water. Monkey, of course, just leapt into the air and helped his Master back to the land.

	But the Scriptures and all the luggage were wet, and as they climbed to the riverbank a great wind began to blow. The sky grew black and lightning lit up the sky. Tripitaka held the Scriptures close to him while Sandy held the luggage and Pigsy held the white horse.

	Monkey knew that this storm was caused by demons who were trying to steal the Scriptures. The demons attacked all through the night, stopping only when the sun began to come up. And although nobody could see them, Monkey hit out with his cudgel at them, holding it in both hands and hitting first to the right and then to the left.

	Tripitaka, who was already wet from the storm, was left shaking with fear.

	'Monkey,' he asked in a shocked voice, 'what does all this mean?'

	'It is jealousy,' answered Monkey. 'The success of our journey has put jealousy in the heart of every demon in Heaven and on Earth, because our power is almost as great as theirs now. It is good that you kept the Scriptures close to you. That and my cudgel saved us from losing the holy words.'

	Tripitaka then understood and he thanked Monkey for his protection.

	When the sun was hotter, they dried their clothes and the Scriptures on a rock. Even today this rock is called The Rock Where the Scriptures Were Dried. They also dried their shoes and clothes.

	When they had almost finished, some workers came past. They said, 'Are you not the gentlemen who crossed the river to fetch the Scriptures from India?'

	'That is right,' said Pigsy. 'How do you recognise us?'

	'We are from Mr Ch'en's farm,' they answered.

	'How far is it from here?' Pigsy asked.

	'If you went about twenty kilometres south from here, you would come to it,' they answered.

	'Let's take the Scriptures and dry them at the farm,' said Pigsy. 'If we go there, we can sit down comfortably and get something to eat.'

	'I am not going,' said Tripitaka. 'We can dry the scriptures very well here.'

	But then Mr Ch'en himself appeared. 'I see that you have got the Scriptures,' he said happily. 'Please come home with me!'

	'Wait until our Scriptures are dry,' said Monkey. 'Then we will go home with you.'

	'I see that your clothes are wet too. What has happened to you?' asked Mr Ch'en.

	Tripitaka explained about the white turtle. When he finished, Mr Ch'en again asked them to follow him home. In the end, Tripitaka accepted the kind offer. But when they were collecting the Scriptures, some of the paper stuck to the rock, and part of the last sheet of paper was lost. That is why it is incomplete today. And still today you can find some writing on the Rock Where the Scriptures Were Dried.

	Tripitaka was very upset. 'We were not careful enough,' he said sadly.

	'Don't get yourself so upset,' said Monkey. 'These Scriptures are now as they are supposed to be. Heaven and Earth are not more complete. The missing part is a secret and it is not meant to be read by others. You were as careful as you needed to be. You did nothing wrong.'

	Back at the farm, they were welcomed by everybody there, young and old, and given all the best wine and food. As a Buddha, though, Tripitaka had lost his taste for earthly food, and Monkey wanted only fruit. Sandy ate very little, and even Pigsy ate less than he had before.

	'I do not know why I cannot eat more,' he said sadly.

	After they had eaten, Mr Ch'en said, 'We have had some pictures painted of you. We wanted to thank you for saving War Boy and Much Gold.' Then War Boy and Much Gold came into the room and bowed. The pilgrims were invited to look at pictures of themselves in the upstairs room of the farm.

	'Yours is very like you,' said Pigsy, pushing his elbow gently into Monkey's side.

	'I think yours is wonderfully like you too,' said Sandy to Pigsy. 'But the Master's painting is a little too handsome, really.'

	'I think it is very good,' said Tripitaka.

	The brothers Ch'en and all their workers prayed to these pictures every day.

	Since their prayers had started, there had been no more damage from rain and everybody had had plenty to eat.

	'That is a gift from Heaven, not from us,' said Monkey. 'But we will certainly try to protect you. You will have many children and those children will have many children. Your animals will grow fat, and the wind and the rain will come at the right time of year.'

	The people thanked him again. And again they offered more fruit and cake.

	'It is my bad luck,' said Pigsy. 'I used to be able to eat a lot, but in those days no one pushed food on me. Now I eat very little and everybody wants to see me eat more!' Because he did not want to insult the Ch'en family, Pigsy managed to eat eight or nine dishes of vegetables and twenty or thirty cakes.

	It was now late at night. Tripitaka watched the Scriptures but he felt nervous. 'I think we should leave,' he told Monkey. 'If we stay here too long, people will try to get our secrets from us.'

	'I agree with you,' said Monkey. 'We had better go quietly while everyone is still asleep.'

	Pigsy was not a fool now. Sandy and the horse clearly saw the need to go too. And as the pilgrims left the farm, a sweet-smelling wind took them up and away on a cloud.

	In the morning, the villagers came again with offers of fruit and other special food. It was a terrible surprise when they found that the pilgrims had disappeared. They looked everywhere for them, but after a few hours they gave up hope.

	'Why have you taken our living Buddha away?' they cried to the God of Continuing Days.

	Since that time, four times a year, the villagers have performed a special dance in front of the pictures of the Master and his followers. The farm has been turned into a temple and at every hour of every day there are people praying on their knees there. Some pray for better health, some pray for protection on a journey and others pray for their children's future.

	Less than a day after they left Ch'en's farm, the pilgrims could see in the distance the towers of Ch'ang-an. It was thirteen years and nine months since Tripitaka had departed.

	The Emperor had ordered a high tower to be built outside the western gates and had named it the Scripture Lookout Tower. And now, looking out, he suddenly saw the whole western sky fill with a magic light. A minute later, he noticed a sweet smell in the wind.

	The Protectors went with the pilgrims as far as the gates of the city.

	'We prefer to wait here for you,' they said to Tripitaka. 'The people around here are very tricky. We do not want them to know that we are here. And there is no need for your followers to go with you. But you, Master, had better go at once and give the Emperor the Scriptures. We will wait for you here and then we will all go back and report to Buddha's Holy Mountain.'

	'That sounds fine,' said Monkey. 'But how can the Master carry the Scriptures and who is going to lead his horse? We had better go with him.'

	'Kuan-yin promised Buddha that the whole journey would take only eight days. If you all go, Pigsy will be looking around for food, and you will lose time,' said one of the Protectors.

	'How can you be so rude?' cried Pigsy. 'Why should I waste time here? I am as anxious as anyone to get back to Buddha's Holy Mountain. The Master has become a Buddha and I intend to become a Buddha too. You wait here. When we have given the Emperor the Scriptures, I will go back with you and will get my reward.'

	Then, with Pigsy carrying the luggage, Sandy leading the horse and Monkey at Tripitaka's side, they stopped in front of the tower.

	The Emperor and his ministers came down to meet them.

	'So my dear brother has come at last!' the Emperor cried, giving him a horse to ride into the city.

	When they were seated in the Great Hall, the Scriptures were put in front of the Emperor. Tripitaka told the story of how he arrived at the Holy Mountain. He told of the trick played by Buddha's two followers. He described how he had, in the end, got the written Scriptures by giving his golden bowl as a gift.

	'There are, in total, five thousand and forty-eight chapters,' he added.

	The Emperor was very happy and he ordered a banquet. Suddenly, he noticed the three pilgrims, who were sitting at the far end of the Hall. He thought they looked unusual.

	'I suppose these gentlemen are foreigners?' said the Emperor.

	'My oldest follower, named Monkey,' said Tripitaka, 'came from the Cave of the Water Curtain on the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit. Five hundred years ago he made trouble in Heaven and Buddha sent him to a stone prison under a mountain. But he became a holy man with the help of the Goddess Kuan-yin.

	I was able to free him and take him with me as my follower. He protected me on the journey to India and he helped me to get the Scriptures. Without him, I would not be here now.

	'My second follower, Pigsy, came from the Cloud-Ladder Cave and was at the farm of Mr Kao when I found him. He has carried the luggage all through our travels and he was very helpful when we had to get across rivers.

	'My third follower, Sandy, came from the River of Sands. He too was brought to me by the Goddess Kuan-yin. And our horse is not the one that you gave to me.'

	'Really?' said the Emperor. 'It looks the same to me. Why did you change horses?'

	'Actually,' said Tripitaka, 'my first horse was eaten by this one. But Monkey went to Kuan-yin and the Goddess explained that this horse was really a son of the Dragon King of the Western Ocean. He got into some trouble, but he took me to the West and so his life was saved. He has carried me well, over the most difficult hills and mountains. On the way there, I rode on its back; on the way home, it carried the Scriptures. As you can imagine, we are all very grateful to him.'

	'You have been served well. Tell me,' said the Emperor, 'how far is it to India?'

	'I know only that the summer turned to winter fourteen times. There was no day when we did not ride over hills or mountains. Often we rode through large forests or crossed great rivers and we passed through too many countries to count.'

	When the banquet was ready, the Emperor asked, 'Do your followers know how to behave at an Emperor's banquet?'

	'I am afraid that they do not,' said Tripitaka. 'They have spent their time mostly in rough country conditions.'

	'Don't worry,' said the Emperor. 'I will not blame them. Tell them to come to the banquet.'

	There was dancing and singing and music and food at the banquet, and it was a very happy day. In the evening, when the meal ended, the pilgrims went to Tripitaka's old temple in the woods. There the priests welcomed them with a bow.

	This time, inside the temple, Pigsy did not shout for more food and Monkey and Sandy behaved perfectly. All three were now Spirits of Wisdom, and it was not difficult for them to stay quiet. When night came, they all went to sleep.

	Early next morning, the Emperor woke and called for his secretaries.

	'All night I could not sleep because I was thinking of good enough words to thank my brother for his success. I have now, in my head, a few sentences, although they are nothing compared to the wisdom of the Scriptures.'

	He asked the secretaries to write down his words, which later became known to all as the Introduction to Buddha's Holy Teachings.

	The Emperor then asked Tripitaka to read from some of the Holy Scriptures in the holiest temple in the city. As the Scriptures were so valuable, the Emperor ordered his secretaries to make copies, which were later sent to every city in China.

	As Tripitaka started reading, he smelled the sweet wind and the Protectors appeared in the air above the pilgrims. They said, 'You must all leave the Scriptures and follow us to the West.'

	At once Monkey and the others, including the white horse, got up from the ground. Tripitaka put down the Scripture that he had started reading. He was lifted straight up to the Ninth Heaven. The Emperor and his ministers bowed low to the ground as they were carried away.

	Later, all the people of the city prayed and read the Great Scriptures, and their lives were much better after that.

	The four pilgrims and the white horse were taken back to Buddha's Holy Mountain by the Protectors. There they found that their great journey had taken just eight days. On the Holy Mountain they and all the Gods waited for Buddha.

	When everyone was ready, Buddha appeared and spoke first to Tripitaka.

	'Holy priest,' he said, 'in a past life you were close to me and you were called Golden Tree. But because you did not obey my teaching, you had to start life again in the East. Now you have obeyed me so well that I am making you a Buddha. Your title will be Buddha of Ability.

	'Monkey, because you made trouble in Heaven, you were put under the Mountain of Metal, Wood, Water, Fire and Earth. Fortunately, when your time there was finished, you turned your heart to religion, to the fight against wrongdoing and the fight for good. On your recent journey you have done so well that I am making you a Buddha. You will be the Buddha of Success in Difficult Times.

	'Pigsy, you were a soldier of the water armies of Heaven. But at a banquet you drank too much and insulted a goddess. And for this you were born again in the human world, looking very much like an animal. When you were living at the Cloud-Ladder Cave, you found religion and offered your protection to Tripitaka on his journey. You are still greedy, but because you carried the luggage all the way, I am now making you the Keeper of the Holy Temple.'

	'Hey!' said Pigsy. 'You have just made the others Buddhas. Why am I not a Buddha too?'

	'Because,' answered Buddha, 'your conversation and appearance are still not fine enough and you still eat too much. But I have so many followers in the world that you will get plenty to eat in your new job. You will have nothing to complain about.'

	Pigsy knew that he had to accept his new job. He did not say another word.

	'Sandy, you were a great spirit, but at a banquet you broke a dish of great value and you were sent to the human world. There you lived in the River of Sands and you hungrily ate people. But after that you found religion. You promised to protect and help Tripitaka, and you did. Because of this, I am lifting you high among us and giving you the title of Golden-Bodied Soldier.'

	Sandy bowed. Happily, he accepted his new title.

	Then Buddha turned to the white horse. 'You,' he said, 'were a child of the Dragon King of the Western Ocean, but you disobeyed your father and were guilty of bad behaviour. Fortunately, you found religion. Because you carried Tripitaka to the West, and the Holy Scriptures on the return journey, you too must have your reward. From this day, you will be one of the eight Heavenly Dragons.'

	The white horse made a sign to show how grateful it was. It was led to the back of the Holy Mountain, where there was the Pool of Magic Dragons, and it was pushed into the pool. After a short time, it began to change shape and its coat began to change to a golden colour. Its four feet rested on the clouds and then it flew up out of the pool. It was now changed from a horse to a magic dragon.

	'Master,' said Monkey to Tripitaka, 'I am now a Buddha, like you. I should not have to wear a cap so that you can control me.'

	'It was put on you,' said Tripitaka, 'at a time when you knew nothing. Then we needed to control you. Now you are a Buddha and it has gone. Feel your head and you will see. It is not there now.'

	Monkey put his hand on his head. Tripitaka was right; the cap had gone. A grateful smile spread across his face.

	All the spirits of Heaven watched as Tripitaka, Monkey,

	Pigsy, Sandy and the horse received their new, holy titles.

	While they went to their places in the Great Hall, many loud voices began to pray to them. They were accepted with open arms. And from that day, Pigsy did not shout for more food and Monkey and Sandy behaved perfectly. The reason for this was simple. All three had received the greatest of gifts - wisdom.

	I give this, my book, to you, dear reader, so you can understand the beauty of Buddha's Land. It will be a reward for kindness, and it will help with the suffering of the lost souls of this world. I would like to think that my readers will turn their hearts towards the True Way, and will be born again in the World of True Happiness.





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	Chapter one

	The Big Four

	High above the water in a modern beach house in Mississippi, four gentlemen enjoyed drinks and waited for a visitor. Normally their work required them to be enemies. This afternoon, however, they'd played golf and eaten grilled seafood together. Each of the men was CEO of a large public corporation. These corporations were extremely successful; the smallest had sales of six hundred million dollars, the largest four billion dollars. Although they manufactured other things, their real profits came from cigarettes - the companies represented here were responsible for 98 percent of all cigarettes sold in the United States and Canada.

	The tobacco business was becoming more and more unpopular. The Big Four, as the four corporations were known in financial circles, were attacked by the public, the medical profession and even some politicians. And now, the lawyers were pursuing them. The survivors of dead smokers were suing them, claiming that cigarettes caused lung cancer. There had been sixteen trials. Until now, the tobacco companies had managed to win every case, but the pressure was increasing. If they lost a single one, they'd face possible claims from millions of people.

	To help fight these court cases, the Big Four had put together a sum of money called The Fund. The Fund was a secret. Officially, it didn't exist. The money in it was used to hire the best defense lawyers for the trials. It paid for well-spoken experts to help persuade people that cigarette smoking didn't necessarily kill you, and the cleverest jury consultants. Before a trial, the jury consultants' job was to find out all they could about possible jurors, so they could predict whether they might be sympathetic to the tobacco companies' case or not.

	The Fund was managed by a man called Rankin Fitch. The four CEOs disliked him, but they listened to what he said and, when necessary, obeyed the instructions he gave. He'd directed eight trials without a loss. Now they were waiting for him to arrive to tell them about the latest trial, Wood vs Pynex. Pynex was the third largest of the Big Four; its CEO was D. Martin Jankle.

	"Fitch is here." The four men each reached for their drinks as Fitch walked into the room. He was a big man in a dark suit; he looked important. An assistant handed him a glass of water, and he waved away a plate of seafood.

	"A brief summary, gentlemen. At the moment, the entire defense team is working non-stop, and this will continue through the weekend. Investigations into possible jurors are on schedule. Trial lawyers are ready, witnesses are prepared, all our experts are already in town."

	"What about the jurors?" asked Jankle. It was his corporations lawsuit, and so he was the most nervous. "One problem juror can be poison."

	"I'm aware of that," Fitch replied coldly.

	"I assume the plaintiff's lawyers are ready?" asked another CEO.

	"Safe assumption," said Fitch. This latest challenge to the tobacco companies had been organized carefully. There were eight lawyers at the last count, financed by eight of the largest law firms in the country, who'd each contributed a million dollars. The lawyers had picked the plaintiff, the widow of a man named Jacob L. Wood. They'd picked the place, on the Mississippi coast, because juries in Biloxi could be generous in this kind of case. They were even lucky with the judge, the Honorable Frederick Harkin. He'd previously been a plaintiff's lawyer. The opposition were certainly ready.

	This wasn't an ordinary tobacco case, and everyone in the room knew it.

	"How long will the trial last?" Jankle finally asked.

	"Four to six weeks. Jury selection goes fast here," replied Fitch.

	"How long should we stay in town?"

	"I don't care. You can leave now, or you can wait until the jury is picked. You all have big jets. If I need you, I can find you." He was suddenly ready to leave. "Anything else?"

	Not a word.

	***

	Wendall Rohr, the main lawyer for the plaintiff, had made and lost his first fortune before he was fifty. He made his second fortune and swore never to lose it. His energies were directed at suing American corporations on behalf of injured people. He'd met Celeste Wood, widow of Jacob Wood, through a young lawyer. Jacob Wood had died at the age of fifty-one after smoking three packs of cigarettes a day for almost thirty years.

	Rohr had raised the first million dollars to fight the case, and then more money had flowed in. His plan was simple and smart. If he won this case, more people would decide to sue. With a hundred million smokers out there, he'd be busy for the rest of his working life.

	Rohr operated from offices near the courthouse, and his team was working hard investigating possible jurors. The tobacco lawyers were down the street working just as hard. Nothing rivaled the thrill of big lawsuits.

	***

	By 8 A.M. on Monday, a crowd was gathering outside the Biloxi courthouse. There were Wall Street financial analysts who were specialists in the price of tobacco shares, sent to follow the early developments of the trial. There was a group of people growing larger by the minute, each holding a piece of paper - a jury summons. Seven deputies had been assigned to security duties.

	At eight-thirty the doors to the courtroom, on the second floor, opened. A court official, Gloria Lane, checked each summons, greeted the people she knew, and organized them into their seats. There were 194 possible jurors. All were given forms to complete. The lawyers arrived in dark suits, and tried to look at the jurors without being noticed.

	Behind the lawyers sat the jury consultants, watching the possible jurors for any gestures - arms folded across the chest, or fingers picking nervously at teeth - which might reveal their real thoughts and opinions. Juror number fifty-six, Nicholas Easter, received more than his share of anxious looks. He worried the jury consultants, as they hadn't been able to find out very much about him.

	The last lawyer into the room was Wendall Rohr. He stared at the possible jurors. These were his people. This was his case, in his home town. He nodded at a couple, grinned at another. Together they'd find the truth.

	Rankin Fitch was also in court, pretending to read a newspaper.

	Then Judge Harkin arrived. He completed a short welcoming speech. The lawsuit had begun four years ago, and the documents now filled eleven boxes. Each side had already spent millions to reach this point.

	The jury selection started. Six people over the age of sixty-five who hadn't been identified by the computer were free to leave. Five of them left.

	"Is anybody legally blind?" the Judge asked. Slowly a hand was raised from the center of the pack. Juror number sixty-three, Mr. Herman Grimes, age fifty-nine, computer programmer, white, married, no kids. What was this? Did nobody know this man was blind? The jury consultants whispered on both sides.

	"Mr. Grimes, you are excused from jury duty. You're free to go."

	Herman Grimes didn't move. He just looked at whatever he could see and said, "Why do I have to leave?"

	"Because you're blind."

	"I know that. Who says blind people can't serve on juries? You tell me why. If it's written in the law, the law is unfair, and I'll sue. If it isn't written in the law, I'll sue even faster."

	The law said that a blind person may be excused from jury service, so the Judge decided not to insist. "On second thoughts, Mr. Grimes, I think you'd be an excellent juror. Please sit down." Herman nodded politely. "Thank you, sir,"

	The Judge continued to release possible jurors with physical problems. At noon, thirteen had been dismissed. By 3 P. M. the number remaining was down to 159. Then the group were asked about any non-medical problems. Eleven more were dismissed, and another form was given out, with instructions to the jurors that they should complete it by nine the next morning.

	***

	The form included questions like, Do you smoke cigarettes? Do you want to stop? Has any member of your family, or anyone you know well, suffered any disease or illness directly linked to smoking cigarettes? Other questions explored their opinions on tax and smokers' rights. Then: Do you know any of the lawyers working on the case? Do you know any of the possible witnesses?

	Nicholas Easter made another cup of coffee. He'd spent an hour with the questions last night, and another hour this morning. He knew that handwriting experts would study everything he wrote. He wanted to appear neat, thoughtful, and intelligent, a juror that both sides would love.

	Many of the questions had been used in the Cimmino tobacco case last year in Allentown, Pennsylvania. Nicholas had been a possible juror in that case too. But then he'd been known as David Lancaster, a part-time film student with a beard and glasses. He hadn't been selected for the jury. A month later, he'd shaved his beard, thrown away his glasses, and left town.

	Nicholas knew that there were people on both sides trying to find out about his past. His present apartment was only a temporary home. It was basic, but although he had a better address four blocks away, he couldn't risk being seen there.

	***

	In court on the second day, the forms were collected from the possible jurors and six more were excused for personal reasons. Then the show began. Wendall Rohr introduced the plaintiff, Celeste Woods, to the court. A small woman of fifty-five, she tried to look as if she was still saddened over the death of her husband, although he'd been dead for four years. In fact, she'd almost remarried, an event which Rohr had persuaded her to cancel when he heard about it. She could marry after the trial, he told her.

	Rohr started questioning the possible jurors about their previous jury service and their opinions on the rights of victims and the price of insurance.

	The jury had a lunch break; Gloria Lane and her staff handed out box lunches to the lawyers, containing thin sandwiches and red apples. This was going to be a working lunch for them. Outside the courtroom, forms were being analyzed by the jury consultants and the results were being fed into computers. After three hours' discussion with the lawyers, the Judge removed another thirty-one names. The group was down to 111.

	The following morning, it was the turn of the main lawyer for Pynex, Durwood Cable, senior partner for Whitney & Cable & White. His opponent, Wendall Rohr, was friendly and sociable; Cable, on the other hand, seemed quieter. He talked slowly, but his gray eyes missed nothing.

	"My name is Durwood Cable and I represent Pynex, a company that has been making cigarettes for ninety years." There, he wasn't ashamed of it! He did an expert job of persuading his audience that his client was almost likeable. Cable then talked about the freedom to choose whether to smoke cigarettes or not. He asked a lot of questions, got a few responses, and finished at noon, in time for a quick lunch.

	Before three o'clock, the lawyers on both sides had to agree on the final jury selection. According to the rules, each side could ask for a number of strikes, which meant that a possible juror could be dismissed for no reason. Because of the importance of this case, Judge Harkin had granted each side the right to do this ten times, instead of the usual four. The process started. Out of the first thirty names, ten were selected. Finally, the jury was complete, and Nicholas Easter had become the eleventh juror for Wood vs Pynex.

	When the courtroom was opened at three, Judge Harkin called out the names of the chosen twelve. Nicholas, twenty-seven, was the second youngest juror. There were nine whites, three blacks, seven women, five men - one blind. In the corner of the jury box, there were three extra jurors. These would replace any member of the jury who had to leave the jury for some reason.

	The Judge forbade the jurors from discussing the case with anyone, and with a pleasant smile, dismissed them for the night.



	Chapter two

	The Case Opens

	At eight-thirty in the morning, Nicholas slipped through the unlocked back door of the courthouse and went up to the second floor. He knew the building well. Three weeks earlier, unnoticed, when there was no one around, he'd explored the area around the courtroom, including the Judge's chambers, the witness rooms and, of course, the jury room. He went there now, and found Lou Dell sitting outside the room, reading a romantic novel.

	"Good morning. Can I help you?" Her entire face was one large smile.

	"Nicholas Easter," he said as he reached for her outstretched hand. She found his name on her paperwork.

	"Welcome to the jury room. Is this your first trial?"

	"Yes."

	"Come on," she said, pulling him into the room. "Coffee and cakes are over here. I made these cookies myself."

	Nicholas poured black coffee into a plastic cup. There was a list of instructions for the jurors from Judge Harkin, including the order that they couldn't discuss the case with anyone. They couldn't even discuss the case with each other, until instructed by the Judge. Nicholas signed the list at the bottom, as requested.

	The door opened with a kick, and Mr. Herman Grimes entered with his walking stick tapping along in front of him. His wife was close behind, describing the room to him under her breath. Nicholas introduced himself.

	"My favorite uncle's blind," Nicholas said. "I'd consider it an honor if you'd allow me to assist you during the trial."

	"Thank you," said Herman, after a brief pause.

	"Thank you, sir," his wife said.

	At ten o'clock, Judge Harkin looked around the crowded courtroom and decided that everyone was in place. "Bring in the jury," he said. The jurors walked in.

	"Good morning," said the Judge. "Do we have a foreman?"

	"It's me, Your Honor," Herman Grimes said.

	The lawyers and jury consultants for the defense were worried by this choice of foreman, but their expressions remained warm and positive.

	Nicholas Easter looked cautiously around the courtroom. On the second row, behind the defense, Rankin Fitch sat trying to look uninterested in the jury, but Nicholas knew better. Fitch missed nothing. Fourteen months earlier, Nicholas had seen him in the Cimmino courtroom in Allentown, Pennsylvania. Nicholas knew that Fitch would have investigated his background and found that some of what he'd said wasn't true.

	There were also small groups of people whom Nicholas was certain were the jury consultants. The selecting was done, so now they moved to the next phase - watching. They listened to every word spoken by every witness, and predicted how the jury would react. If a witness seemed to make a bad impression on the jury, they could be removed, sent home, and replaced by another witness.

	After a sign from the Judge, Wendall Rohr started his opening statement. He told the jury that he'd prove that Mr. Jacob Wood, a fine fellow, developed lung cancer after smoking cigarettes for almost thirty years. The cigarettes killed him. How could they prove that cigarettes caused lung cancer? They'd bring along cancer experts, and talk to people who used to work in the tobacco industry.

	Rohr finished in fifty minutes, smiled, and sat down. Durwood Cable, for the defense, spoke for under thirty minutes. He calmly assured the jurors that Pynex had its own experts who would clearly explain that cigarettes don't cause lung cancer. Cable spoke without notes, looking carefully into the eyes of each juror. His voice and stare were honest. You wanted to believe this man.

	***

	The first crisis occurred at lunch. Judge Harkin announced the noon break at 12:10, and the jurors left the court. Lou Dell took them to the jury room.

	"Just have a seat," she said, "and lunch will be here in a moment."

	Herman Grimes took a seat at the head of the table next to Millie Dupree, a kind woman of fifty who actually knew another blind person. Nicholas introduced himself to Lonnie Shaver, the only black man on the jury and the manager of a grocery store.

	Twenty minutes passed, and no lunch appeared. At twelve-thirty, Nicholas said, "Hey, Herman, where's our lunch?"

	"I'm just the foreman," Herman answered with a smile, as the room was suddenly quiet.

	Nicholas walked to the door and asked Lou Dell to come in.

	"We re hungry," he said.

	Lou Dell looked at the other eleven faces and said, "Its on the way."

	"Where's it coming from?" he demanded.

	"O'Reilly's restaurant. Just around the corner."

	"Listen," said Nicholas. "We can't go out and eat a nice lunch like normal people. So if lunch is going to be here, I hope there isn't going to be a problem every day. I suggest you get on the phone and find out where it is, or I'll discuss it with Judge Harkin."

	The door closed.

	"That was a bit hard, don't you think?" asked Millie Dupree.

	"Maybe, and if it was, I'll apologize," said Nicholas. "But if we don't get things organized at the beginning, they'll forget about us. Do you realize that in almost every trial, they allow the jurors to go out and eat?"

	"How do you know?" asked Millie Dupree.

	"I know a little about the system. I had two years of law school." The other jurors were impressed.

	No food had arrived by 12:45.

	"It should be here soon," said Lou Dell nervously. "I'm really sorry."

	"Where's the men's room?" asked Nicholas.

	Lou Dell gave him directions, but Nicholas walked past the door and out of the courthouse to Mary Mahoney's, a local restaurant. Nicholas had done the same walk a week ago - and had even eaten at a table close to Judge Harkins. He went up to the Judge's table.

	"Sorry to interrupt, sir," Nicholas said.

	"What are you doing here?" Harkin asked.

	"I'm here on behalf of your jury. While you're having a nice lunch here, we're sitting in a tiny room waiting for food. We're hungry, and we're upset."

	Harkin stood up. "Well, let's go and see."

	When they got back to the jury room, the table was bare. No food. The time was 1:05.

	Lou Dell suddenly arrived. She was breathless. "I've just talked to O'Reilly's," she said. "Someone called them to say we wouldn't need lunch until one-thirty."

	"These people are starving," said the Judge. He turned to the jury. "I'm very sorry. This won't happen again." He paused, looked at his watch, and smiled. "I'm inviting you to follow me to Mary Mahoney's and join me for lunch."

	The restaurant served the jurors with delicious grilled seafood. Nicholas was the hero of the day.

	Later, Mr. O'Reilly met with Judge Harkin. He swore on a Bible that he'd talked to a woman who said she was ringing from the courthouse. She'd instructed him to deliver lunch at exactly one-thirty.

	The trials first witness was the dead man, Jacob Wood, testifying on a video which had been filmed a few months before his death. He was thin and pale, and sounded sick. He was fifty-one and looked twenty years older.

	When the jury felt sleepy, the Judge gave them a break. The four smokers needed a cigarette, and Lou Dell took them to a separate room.

	"If you can't stop smoking after this trial, something's wrong," she said, jokingly.

	The four didn't smile. Jerry Fernandez, thirty-eight, a car salesman with casino debts and a bad marriage, lit his cigarette first. Then he passed his lighter to the three women.

	"Here's to Jacob Wood," Jerry said. The three women said nothing - they were busy smoking. One of them was a tall woman with a long pointed nose, called Sylvia Taylor-Tatum, "I wonder who's next?" Jerry continued.

	"I guess all those doctors," Sylvia replied, sucking hard on her cigarette.

	***

	The woman's name was Marlee; at least that was the name she'd chosen for this period of her life. She was thirty, with short brown hair and brown eyes. She'd been in the courtroom before and she knew her way around. She sat in the back row, and just before the Judge arrived she asked one of the deputies to deliver a letter to Rankin Fitch.

	Fitch was surprised to see his name on the envelope. No one knew his name, except his employees and clients. He read the note:



	Dear Mr. Fitch:

	Tomorrow, juror number two, Easter, will wear a gray and red sweater, white socks, and brown leather shoes.



	Fitch went up to the deputy who was standing by the courtroom door.

	"Who gave you this?"

	"A woman. I don't know her name." Fitch questioned the deputy about her appearance and voice. With Jose, his driver, he looked around the first floor of the courthouse. Then, as if they were just enjoying some fresh air, the two men walked around the outside of the courthouse. Who was she, and what was going on?

	***

	Fitch had thought about entering Easter's apartment before, but now he knew it was necessary. He sent Jose and another man, Doyle, to the apartment building while Easter was in court. Inside, Doyle photographed the apartment. He was there for no more than ten minutes.

	Nicholas left the courthouse on foot and stopped at O'Reilly's for some food. He was certain he was being followed. When he got to his apartment, he entered a four-number code on the door before he unlocked it. He went to his computer and found that an illegal entry had occurred at 4:52 P.M. The secret camera, hidden above the refrigerator, had filmed Doyle. Nicholas watched the video and stared at Doyle's face. He'd never seen him before. Nicholas smiled as he saw Doyle looking at his computer. It was impossible to enter. Doyle couldn't even find the power switch.

	***

	At eight the next morning, Fitch was hiding in a van by Easter's apartment and watched him walk out into the sunshine. Fitch looked out of the van window. "I don't believe it!" Gray and red sweater, white socks, brown shoes. Fitch went straight to his office. "We have to find the girl," he said. "She has something for us."

	His office was in the back of an empty store. No one noticed the place and it was just a short walk from the courthouse. Two men with guns guarded the door at all times. The furniture was cheap, but the office was full of the latest technology. The walls of one room were covered with photos of the jurors.

	The room at the back was the smallest, and was kept locked. It was a viewing room. One of Fitch's people had hidden a tiny camera in a document case which was placed in the courtroom under the defense table and which secretly filmed all the jurors. In the viewing room, two jury consultants watched the results on a large screen. When Fitch talked to Cable, he could tell him how the jurors seemed to be feeling. Cable, however, didn't know about the hidden camera.

	***

	The deal was organized over a three-hour lunch. Luther Vandemeer, CEO of Trellco, one of the Big Four tobacco companies, and his friend, Larry Zell, of Listing Foods, had already talked about it on the phone. Trellco wasn't in court this time, but the Big Four had to stand together. Zell understood. He'd worked for Trellco for seventeen years.

	There was a small, regional grocery company, Hadley Brothers, which owned stores along the Mississippi coast. One store was in Biloxi and its manager was a smart young black man called Lonnie Shaver, who by chance was on the jury in the Pynex trial. Vandemeer wanted one of Listing Food's divisions, SuperHouse, a much larger group of grocery stores, to purchase Hadley Brothers. It would be a small deal, and nothing could go wrong. Listing and Trellco were totally independent of each other, and Listing was already in the grocery store business. Later, of course, there would need to be a reorganization of the company, and pressure could be put on Lonnie Shaver to support the defense.

	They needed to act quickly. The trial was only due to last for four more weeks.



	Chapter three

	Lonnie Shaver's Opportunity

	Easter made sure he was easy to follow over the weekend. On Saturday he worked all day selling computers, then he returned to his apartment and didn't leave it.

	On Sunday he drove to the harbor, where he met Jerry Fernandez. They left in a fishing boat with two others, and returned eight and a half hours later with red faces, a can full of fish, and a boat full of empty beer cans. Fishing was the first hobby of Nicholas Easter that anyone had been able to discover. And Jerry was the first friend.

	There was no sign of the girl.

	***

	She waited only until Monday morning, thirty minutes before the trial restarted. Fitch was in his office. An assistant, Konrad, said, "There's a phone call you might like to take."

	"Her name?"

	"She won't say."

	"Any idea how she got the number?"

	"No."

	"Are you tracing it?"

	"Yes. Give us a minute. Keep her on the line."

	Fitch lifted the telephone receiver. "Yes," he said, as nicely as possible.

	"Is this Mr. Fitch?" she asked, quite pleasantly.

	"It is. And who is this?"

	"Marlee. In about twenty minutes, juror number twelve, Fernandez, will walk into the courtroom holding a copy of Sports Illustrated, the October 12 issue."

	"I see," said Fitch. "Anything else?"

	"No, not now."

	Konrad raced in. "The call came from a pay phone in Gulfpoint, a convenience store."

	"What a surprise," said Fitch as he grabbed his jacket and began straightening his tie. "I guess I'll run to court."

	***

	In the jury room Nicholas waited until the general conversation died down. He said loudly, "Well, did anyone get bribed or followed over the weekend?" There were a few laughs, but no confessions.

	"Why does the Judge keep asking questions like that?" asked Millie Dupree.

	"In similar cases there have been some problems with the jurors," Nicholas explained.

	"I don't think we should discuss this," Herman said.

	"Why not? It's harmless. This isn't about evidence. This is about..." He hesitated a second for effect, then continued, "This is about trying to control the jury." Nicholas had the jurors' attention. "There was a tobacco trial, very similar to this, in Quitman County, Mississippi, about seven years ago. There was some pretty shocking behavior, before and during the trial. Judge Harkin is watching us carefully. Lots of people are watching us."

	"Who?" asked Millie.

	"Both sides," answered Nicholas. "Both sides hire these jury consultants and they come here to help pick the perfect jury. The perfect jury is one that will deliver the verdict that they want. They study us before we're selected."

	"How do they do that?" one of the jurors asked.

	"Well, they photograph us, our apartments, our offices, and our kids. It's just legal, but it's close to being illegal. They might check our tax records and talk to our neighbors."

	All eleven jurors were listening, trying to remember if they'd seen any strangers hiding around street corners with cameras. Nicholas drank some coffee and continued: "After the jury's been picked, it's a little different. Now they're only watching fifteen people - the twelve jurors and the three extra jurors. Throughout the trial, each side will have jury consultants in the courtroom trying to read our reactions. They usually sit on the first two rows. They're well dressed and they stare at us all the time."

	"I thought those folks were newspaper reporters," said another juror, retired Colonel Frank Herrera.

	"I hadn't noticed," said Herman Grimes. Everyone smiled. "Watch them today," Nicholas said. "In fact, I have a great idea. There's one woman who I'm almost positive is a jury consultant for the defense. Every morning since the trial began, she's been on the front row behind Durwood Cable. When we go out this morning, let's stare at her. All twelve of us."

	"Even me?" Herman asked.

	"Yes, Herm, even you. Just turn to ten o'clock, and stare with the rest of us."

	"Why are we playing games?" asked Sylvia Taylor-Tatum. "Why not? What else have we got to do for the next eight hours? Let's do it while Judge Harkin is reminding us about all the rules. That always takes ten minutes."

	***

	Lou Dell came for them at nine. Nicholas held two magazines - one of which was Sports Illustrated. He walked beside Jerry Fernandez until they came to the courtroom, then said to his new friend, "Want something to read?"

	Jerry took the magazine, "Sure, thanks," he said. They walked through the door into the courtroom.

	Fitch knew Fernandez, juror number twelve, would have the magazine, but the sight of it was still a shock. His surprise quickly turned to excitement. Marlee was clearly working on the outside; maybe there were two or three or four members of the jury who were plotting with her. It didn't matter how many jurors were involved; Fitch just wanted to make a deal.

	The jury consultant's name was Ginger. She'd sat through dozens of trials. She looked at the jury and waited for the Judge to greet them, which he did. Most of the jurors nodded and smiled at the Judge. Then all of them, including the blind man, turned and stared directly at her.

	She looked away.

	Judge Harkin continued asking the jurors one question after another and he, too, quickly noticed that the jury were looking at the same person.

	They kept staring, all together. Nicholas found it difficult not to laugh. His luck was unbelievable. Two rows behind Ginger sat Rankin Fitch. It was difficult to tell exactly who the jurors were staring at - Ginger or Fitch. Ginger certainly thought it was her. She found some notes to read. Fitch felt helpless as the twelve faces studied him.

	Judge Harkin finished his questions quickly. "Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Now we will continue with Dr. Milton Fricke."

	After Dr. Fricke had spoken, there was a short break as a new witness, Dr. Robert Bronsky, was called by Wendall Rohr. Fitch was in his office when the call came.

	"It's Marlee, line four," Konrad whispered.

	"Trace the call," Fitch ordered. "Hello."

	"Mr. Fitch?" came the familiar voice.

	"Yes."

	"Do you know why they were staring at you?"

	"No."

	"I'll tell you tomorrow. And if you keep tracing the calls, I'll stop calling."

	Konrad arrived with the expected news that the call had been made from a payphone.

	***

	On Tuesday morning, Nicholas arrived at the jury room early. There were new cups and saucers. Nicholas claimed to hate coffee from a plastic cup, and two of the other jurors said they felt the same. The Judge had agreed to his request.

	Retired Colonel Frank Herrera arrived just after eight. "Morning, Colonel," Nicholas said warmly. "You're early."

	"So are you."

	"I know. I couldn't sleep. I was dreaming of black lungs." Herrera sat down across the table. "I smoked for ten years in the Army," he said. "But I had the good sense to stop."

	"Some people can't, I guess. Like Jacob Wood." The Colonel made a sound of disgust. "Why did you stop?"

	"Because cigarettes are poison. Everybody knows that."

	If Herrera had given those opinions on the pre-trial forms, he wouldn't have been selected. But he probably wanted to be on the jury. He was retired, bored with golf, and tired of his wife. "So should cigarettes be illegal?" Nicholas asked.

	"No, I think people shouldn't be stupid and smoke three packs a day for almost thirty years. What do they expect?" There was no doubt that his mind was made up.

	"You should have said this during jury selection. We were asked questions just like these," said Nicholas.

	Herrera's cheeks went red, but he hesitated for a second. This guy Easter knew the law. "Yes, well, I can be persuaded, you know," Herrera said.

	After a day in court looking at diagrams of lungs and listening to medical explanations from Dr. Bronsky, Lonnie drove to his supermarket.

	"We have guests from Head Office for you" an assistant manager said with a frown.

	In his office Lonnie found three men.

	"Lonnie, good to see you," said Troy Hadley, son of one of the owners. He quickly introduced the others. "Listen, Lonnie, Ken and Ben here are from a company called SuperHouse, and, well, for lots of reasons, my dad and my uncle have decided to sell all seventeen stores to them."

	Lonnie was finding it hard to swallow. "Why?"

	"Two main reasons. Number one, my dad is sixty-eight, and Al, my uncle, has just had surgery, as you know. Also, SuperHouse is offering a good price. It's time to sell."

	"Will this store be closed?" Lonnie asked, almost in defeat.

	Ken picked up a piece of paper. "Well, there are always changes when this sort of thing happens. But we see a future for you with us, Lonnie. We're ashamed to admit that we don't have an African-American in a management position. We want this to change. We'd like you to come to Charlotte as soon as possible and spend a few days with us. When can you come?"

	In a minute Lonnie had gone from near-unemployment to promotion in a new company. He said with obvious disappointment, "I'm on jury service. But what about the weekends?"

	"Can you do this weekend?"

	"Sure," said Lonnie.

	***

	The first person Nicholas saw the following morning in court was the man who'd broken into his apartment. Nicholas had already decided what to do. He wrote a note and asked for it to be handed to the Judge.



	Judge:

	That man out there, left side, third row from the front, white shirt, blue and green tie, was following me yesterday. It's the second time I've seen him. Can we find out who he is?

	Nicholas Easter



	The Judge called a ten-minute break, and asked for Nicholas. "Now, where did you see this man?"

	Nicholas didn't mention the video, but told the Judge that he'd seen the man a couple of times recently.

	The Judge relaxed slightly. "Mr. Easter, have any of the other jurors mentioned anything like this?"

	"No, sir."

	"Will you tell me if they do? If there's something wrong I need to know. You can send a note through Lou Dell."

	"Well, there is something perhaps you ought to know..." He hesitated. "Colonel Herrera thinks that anyone who smokes three packs of cigarettes a day for almost thirty years deserves what he gets.

	The Judge digested this information. "Mr. Easter, I'm not asking you to spy on the other jurors. But I am worried about this jury because of the pressure from the outside. If you see or hear anything, please tell me."

	"Sure, Judge."



	Chapter four

	More Telephone Calls

	The defense's questioning of Bronsky ended late Thursday afternoon, and Marlee struck on Friday morning. Konrad took the first call at 7:25.

	"Good morning, Fitch," she said sweetly, when she was put through.

	"Good morning, Marlee," Fitch answered with a happy voice, his best effort at pleasantness. "And how are you?"

	"Fabulous. Juror number two, Easter, will wear a light blue shirt, faded jeans, and running shoes. And he'll bring with him a copy of Rolling Stone, October issue. Got that?"

	"Yes. When can we get together and talk?"

	"When I'm ready."

	Pang, one of Fitch's technicians, was sitting in a coffee shop near Easter's apartment. On time, Easter left his apartment and started his walk to the courthouse. Of course, he was wearing exactly what she'd promised.

	Marlee's second call came from a different number. "Something new for you, Fitch. You'll love it. Guess what the jurors are going to do today."

	"Tell me."

	"They're going to do the Pledge of Allegiance."

	Marlee's third call went to the offices of Wendall Rohr. She was going to send a fax which must be handed to Mr. Rohr before he left for court. The fax stated which clothes Nicholas Easter would wear that day, and hinted at the Pledge. Rohr called an emergency meeting.

	***

	Before the court started, Nicholas waited for a pause in the conversation. "Hey, Herman, I have an idea."

	By now, Herman knew the other eleven voices from memory. "Yes, Nicholas," he said.

	Nicholas raised his voice so everyone could hear him. "Well, when I was a kid, we started each day at school with the Pledge of Allegiance. Every time I see a flag early in the morning, I have this desire to give the Pledge. And in the courtroom, we have this beautiful flag behind the Judge."

	"You want to do the Pledge of Allegiance out there in open court?" asked Colonel Herrera.

	"Can't see anything wrong with that," said Jerry Fernandez, who'd earlier agreed to support Nicholas.

	"You're not playing games, are you?" asked the Colonel.

	Nicholas looked at him with aching eyes and said, "My father was killed in Vietnam. That flag means a lot to me."

	The plan was agreed. The jurors entered the courtroom. Just before Judge Harkin started his standard speech reminding them that they mustn't have unauthorized contact with anyone, he realized that the jurors were still standing. With their hands on their hearts, and led by Nicholas, they said the Pledge of Allegiance.

	Judge Harkins initial reaction was of disbelief. He glanced at Rohr and Cable, who were open mouthed. Then he stood. Halfway through the Pledge he joined in. Suddenly it seemed important that everyone joined in. The lawyers certainly couldn't show any disloyalty.

	From the back row, Fitch watched in amazement. A jury taking control of a courtroom! It was extraordinary that Marlee knew it was going to happen. It was exciting that she was playing games with him. But Fitch at least had some idea of what was happening. Wendall Rohr, on the other hand, felt completely defeated. He was shocked by the sight of Easter dressed exactly as the fax had said, and then starting the Pledge. He stared at the jury, especially Easter, and wondered what was going on.

	The Pledge finished and the jurors sat down. Judge Harkin seemed determined to act as if this was normal behavior.

	"I believe we're ready for a new witness," he said.

	Rohr stood, still shocked, and said, "The plaintiff calls Dr. Hilo Kilvan,"

	The next expert witness entered the courtroom.

	***

	Lonnie was collected early Saturday morning by a company jet, and was flown to Charlotte. Ken met him at the airport in a company van, and fifteen minutes later they arrived at the SuperHouse headquarters. Ken and Ben showed him around. They had coffee with George Teaker, the CEO, in his large office, and then Lonnie was shown a video about the company. According to the video, SuperHouse was going to grow by 15 percent a year for the next six years. Profits would be amazing.

	When the video finished, a young man arrived with details about health care, share options, and vacations. After lunch in a smart restaurant, there were more meetings and another video. By now, Lonnie needed some fresh air, and Ken suggested that they could go and play golf. Lonnie had never played golf before, a fact that Ken knew, but he suggested that they go and get some sunshine anyway. They drove through neat farms and tree-lined roads until they reached the country club.

	Lonnie was nervous about entering a smart country club and decided to leave if he saw no other black faces. But George Teaker was in the club lounge with two black gentlemen. They all greeted Lonnie warmly and he felt much better. They drank and talked and planned the future. Lonnie stayed the night in the country club, and woke the next morning with a slight headache.

	That morning there were two brief meetings. The first was with George Teaker, who wanted Lonnie to run the Biloxi store for ninety days, under a new contract. If all went well, he'd be transferred to a larger store. They were then joined by a lawyer, Taunton, who handed Lonnie a proposed contract of employment.

	"Look over it," Taunton said, tapping his chin with a designer pen, "and we'll talk next week." He took out a notepad. "Just a few questions," he said. The questions were routine. Then he asked, "Have you, in your capacity as store manager, been involved in litigation?"

	"Yes, I have," replied Lonnie. "About four years ago, an old man slipped and fell on a wet floor. He sued. "

	"Did it go to trial?" asked Taunton. He knew every detail.

	"No," replied Lonnie. "The claim was settled out of court."

	Taunton glanced at Teaker and said, "This tobacco trial in Biloxi could be serious for companies like ours. If the plaintiff wins the case and there's a big verdict, there will be a lot more tobacco litigation. The lawyers will go crazy. They'll bankrupt the tobacco companies."

	"We make a lot of money from tobacco sales, Lonnie," Teaker said, with perfect timing.

	"There has to be an end to these trials. The tobacco industry has never lost one of them. I think their record is something like fifty-five wins." He took a deep breath. "Sorry if I said too much. But this trial is so important."

	Lonnie thought about this. Taunton was a lawyer, so he wouldn't talk about the trial in a way that wasn't appropriate. "No problem," he said.

	Taunton was suddenly all smiles and promised to call Lonnie. The meeting was over.

	***

	On Monday morning, the jurors met over coffee, and talked about their weekends. Herman was late so he couldn't stop them whispering about the trial.

	"I think I was followed at the weekend," said Nicholas.

	"Why would they follow you?" someone asked.

	"That's what the tobacco companies do. They spend millions of dollars selecting us, and more watching us."

	"How do you know it's the tobacco company?" asked Sylvia, lighting another cigarette.

	"I don't. But they have more money than the plaintiff. In fact they have unlimited funds to fight these cases."

	***

	For Wendall Rohr and the plaintiff's team, the weekend had brought no rest. They'd traced Marlee's fax back to a truck stop near Hattiesburg, and obtained an unclear description of a young woman, late twenties, maybe early thirties, wearing a fishing cap, with a face half-hidden by dark glasses. It was the opinion of the eight principal plaintiff's lawyers that this was something new. No one could recall a trial in which a person outside had contacted the lawyers with hints of what the jury might do. They all agreed that she'd be back and that she'd probably ask for money. A deal - money for a verdict.

	They didn't dare, however, to plan how they might deal with her. Maybe later, but not now.

	Fitch, on the other hand, thought of little else. He'd spent the weekend watching jurors and meeting with lawyers. He'd been pleased with the Ken and Ben show in Charlotte, and had been assured by George Teaker that they could trust Lonnie Shaver. Fitch slept four hours Saturday and five Sunday. He dreamed of the girl Marlee, and what she might bring him. This could be his easiest verdict yet.

	***

	Fitch watched the courtroom on Monday from the viewing room in his office. He listened as Dr. Hilo Kilvan continued with his testimony. Fitch's consultants were certain that the plaintiff's witnesses hadn't really made a strong impression on the jurors.

	In court, Nicholas sent a note to the Judge saying that he needed to see him urgently. At lunchtime, he went to the Judge's chambers.

	"I need to be quick," said Nicholas. "It's Frank Herrera. We talked about him last time. Well, his mind is made up, and I'm afraid he's trying to influence people."

	"Is he discussing the case?"

	"Once, with me. Herman is very proud of being foreman of the jury, and he won't allow talk about the trial. And another thing." Nicholas opened his case and pulled out a videocassette. He looked at a videocassette recorder in the corner. "May I?"

	The Judge nodded. On the video, they watched a man enter Nicholas's apartment. They saw the man, Doyle, taking pictures of the apartment and then leaving. "I was robbed and beaten about five years ago and I almost died. I'm careful about security now," said Nicholas.

	***

	Fitch's sandwich was interrupted with the words he was waiting to hear: "The girl's on the line." He grabbed the phone.

	"Fitch, baby. It's me, Marlee. Don't know the guy's name, but he's the goon you sent into Easter's apartment on Thursday, just after I gave you the note. Anyway, later, you sent the same goon into the courtroom. That was stupid because Easter recognized him, and he sent a note to the Judge. Are you listening, Fitch?" Listening, but not breathing. "Yes."

	"Well, now the Judge knows that the guy broke into Easter's apartment. So get him out of town, fast."

	Two hours later, Doyle was flying to Chicago.

	***

	At three-thirty, the jurors were sent back to their room, and Judge Harkin questioned the lawyers about the break-in at Nicholas's apartment. Nicholas was called to the meeting, and the Judge questioned him about the man who'd been following him. Nicholas answered in perfect detail, giving dates and places and also describing the security measures in his apartment. He played the videocassette again. After he'd gone, Judge Harkin and the lawyers considered their options.

	Back in court, Judge Harkin apologized for his decision. It was very rare to sequester a jury. But he had no choice in this case. The jurors should leave, go home, pack, and report to the court the next day, ready to spend the next two weeks sequestered.



	Chapter five

	The Siesta Motel

	On Monday night, Nicholas invited Jerry to go to a casino to celebrate their last hours of freedom. Jerry invited Sylvia Taylor-Tatum. They were becoming friendly - Sylvia was divorced for the second time, and Jerry would soon be divorced for the first.

	Lonnie Shaver spent Monday night working. He contacted George Teaker at his home and explained that the jury was going to be sequestered and that the Judge had forbidden any direct phone calls to and from the motel. Teaker was sympathetic, and worried about the result of the trial.

	"Our people in New York think a guilty verdict could really damage the economy, especially in our business."

	"I'll do what I can," Lonnie promised.

	"You've got to help us, Lonnie. I know it's difficult, but you're there, know what I mean?"

	"Sure, I understand. I'll do what I can."

	Durwood Cable waited until almost nine on Monday evening to talk to Fitch.

	"We were embarrassed in court this afternoon," Cable said. "Who was the guy in the apartment?"

	"He wasn't one of my men. We have reason to believe that he was a goon employed by Rohr and his boys."

	"Can you prove it?"

	"I don't have to prove a damn thing. And I don't have to answer any more questions. Your job is to win in court."

	"I rarely lose."

	Fitch went to the door. "I know. And you're doing a fine job, Cable. You just need a little help from the outside."

	***

	Nicholas arrived first with two gym bags filled with clothes. Lou Dell and Willis, a deputy, were waiting outside the jury room to collect the bags and store them. It was 8:20, Tuesday morning. "How do the bags get from here to the hotel?"

	"We'll take them over later," Willis said, "but we have to inspect them first."

	"No one is inspecting these bags."

	"Judge's orders," said Lou Dell.

	"I don't care what the Judge has ordered. No one is inspecting my bags." Nicholas placed them in a corner and walked to the coffeepot.

	By 8:45, all twelve jurors were present and the room was full of baggage that Nicholas had rescued and stored. He'd done a fine job of making the jury feel really angry about the question of their baggage. At nine, Lou Dell knocked on the door.

	"It's time to go. The Judge is ready for you."

	"Tell the Judge we're not coming out," said Nicholas.

	The courtroom was full on Tuesday morning, so many people witnessed Lou Dell whispering to the Judge. He wondered what to do. His jury was on strike!

	The Judge addressed the court. "Gentlemen, there is a small problem with the jury. I need to speak to them."

	When the Judge knocked on the jury door, Nicholas opened it.

	"Whats the problem?" asked the Judge.

	"We don't think it fair that the deputies search our bags."

	"Why not? It's routine in all sequestration cases."

	"These are our personal possessions. We're not terrorists or drug smugglers. We're not coming out until you promise our bags will be left alone."

	"Fine," replied the Judge. "The bags will not be searched. But if I find out that a juror possesses any item which is on the list I gave you yesterday, then that juror could be sent to jail. Do you understand?"

	Easter looked round the room at the other jurors. "That's fine, Judge," he said. "But there's one other problem. According to your rules here, we're allowed one personal visit per week. We think we should get more."

	The Judge didn't want to have a discussion about it. "Can we agree on two? It's only a couple of weeks," he asked.

	"Two, with a possible third," said Nicholas.

	"That's fine. Does that suit everybody?"

	"Thank you, Your Honor," Herman said loudly.

	The jury were ready to enter the courtroom.

	News of the break-in to Nicholas's apartment affected the Pynex share price. On the Tuesday morning it started to fall. Then rumors started that the jury had refused to leave the jury room because the testimony offered by the plaintiff was so boring. The share price rose again.

	The woman juror that Fitch wanted to influence most was Rikki Coleman. She was a pretty thirty-year-old mother of two. She worked as an administrator in a local hospital, and her husband was a private pilot. Neither of the Colemans smoked and there was no evidence that they drank. Because of her lifestyle, and her job in a hospital, Fitch was afraid of Rikki Coleman as a juror.

	Fitch had managed to get hold of medical records for seven out of the twelve jurors, including those of Rikki Coleman. After some investigation, he discovered that while Rikki had been at a small Bible college in Montgomery, Alabama, she'd become pregnant, but had decided not to have the baby. The operation was carried out in a small private women's hospital, a week after her twentieth birthday. The father wasn't named.

	Rikki had met her husband a year after she finished college. Fitch was willing to bet a lot of money that he didn't know about Rikki's pregnancy.

	***

	The motel was called the Siesta Motel and it was fifty kilometers along the Coast. The trip was made by bus. The jurors felt tired and lonely. Only Nicholas was delighted with sequestration, but he managed to look depressed. The bus was followed by Fitch's boys and two detectives working for Rohr. No one expected the motel address to remain a secret.

	The jurors were on the first floor of one wing of the motel. Lou Dell and Willis had rooms by the door leading to the main building. Another deputy, Chuck, had a room at the other end of the hallway. The rooms had been assigned by Judge Harkin himself. The motel TVs only showed hotel movies - no news or other programs - during sequestration. The telephones had been removed. A room at the end of the hall had been made into a sitting room for the jurors; it was quickly given the name of the Party Room. No one could leave the wing without authorization.

	The following morning over breakfast, the complaints started.

	"I don't understand why we can't have telephones," Nicholas said.

	"Why can't we have a cold beer?" asked Jerry. "I have a cold beer every night when I'm at home, maybe two."

	The complaining increased until the jurors were ready to rebel.

	"We'd better get things sorted out now," said Nicholas seriously. "We're going be here for two weeks, maybe three. I say we talk to Judge Harkin."

	Judge Harkin was in his chambers with the lawyers when Gloria Lane entered.

	"We have another problem with the jury. They're at the motel and they're not coming until they can talk to you."

	The Judge gave a false smile. "Let's go and see them."

	***

	Konrad took the first call at 8:02. She didn't want to talk to Fitch; she just wanted to leave a message that the jury were upset and not leaving the motel until the Judge had seen them. At 8:09, she called again and gave Konrad the information that Easter would be wearing a dark shirt over a brown T-shirt, and red socks. At 8:12 she called again and asked to speak to Fitch.

	"Good morning, Fitch," she said.

	"Good morning, Marlee."

	"Do you know the St. Regis Hotel in New Orleans?"

	"No."

	"It's on Canal Street. There's an open-air bar on the roof. Meet me there at seven tonight."

	Fine.

	"And come alone. I'll watch you enter the hotel, and if you bring friends, the meeting's off. And if you attempt to trail me, I'll disappear."

	Judge Harkin, Cable, and Rohr were met at the front desk of the motel by Lou Dell, who was scared. She led them to the Party Room.

	After a few uncertain hellos, the Judge said, "I'm a little disturbed by this."

	Nicholas Easter replied, "We're not in the mood to take any criticism." He'd written down a list of their complaints. The Judge had to agree. Beer would be no problem. Newspapers would be allowed after they'd been checked. Phone calls were possible. Television was allowed, if they promised not to watch the local news. The Judge asked for a no-strike guarantee in the future, but Easter wouldn't promise anything.

	On the news of a second strike, Pynex shares moved down two points, but later recovered.

	***

	The St. Regis Hotel was watched by Fitch's people from the afternoon, but there was no sign of the girl. Just before seven, Fitch went up in the elevator to the roof and sat down. Several of his people were there, at different tables.

	At seven-thirty she appeared from nowhere. She was very pretty, and Fitch guessed her age to be between twenty-eight and thirty-two. The waiter asked if she wanted something to drink. He'd been bribed to remove anything she touched with her fingers - glasses, plates, anything. He wouldn't get the chance. "Are you hungry?" Fitch asked.

	"No. I'm in a hurry. If I stay, your goons can take more photos."

	"So why are we here?"

	"One meeting leads to another."

	"And where do all the meetings lead us?"

	"To a verdict."

	"For a fee, I'm sure."

	"Let's not talk about money now, OK?"

	They talked briefly about some of the jurors. Fitch found out little about Marlee's real identity or her relationship with Nicholas Easter. As soon as Marlee had left, Fitch ordered his people to go after her. When she was nearly back home in Biloxi, Marlee told the police that she was being followed. Two of Fitch's goons were arrested.

	Later that evening, Nicholas slipped out of the motel and met Marlee, who told him all about her trip to New Orleans.

	***

	Wendall Rohr thought the court was tired of listening to scientists talk about lung cancer and smoking. So on Thursday morning he called Lawrence Krigler as his next witness. Lawrence Krigler had worked for Pynex. He'd left in the middle of a lawsuit with the company - he'd sued Pynex and they'd sued him - which had been settled out of court. While he was there, he did research on the possibility of growing an experimental tobacco leaf which contained much less nicotine. But the company wasn't interested. Nicotine was addictive. More nicotine meant more smokers, which meant more sales and more profits.

	It was an important moment in the trial. Everyone was listening carefully. Over lunch the jury were silent. Did they really hear right? Did tobacco companies keep nicotine levels high so people became addicted?

	In the afternoon, Cable tried to introduce a lot of details into Krigler's testimony, to confuse the jury. But during coffee, Nicholas explained to them what Cable was doing.

	By the end of Thursday, the price of Pynex shares was down. Krigler was quickly flown out of Biloxi by Rohr's security people. Pynex had paid him three hundred thousand dollars out of court just to get rid of him. They wanted him to agree never to testify in trials. He refused, and so his life would always be in danger.



	Chapter six

	The Stillwater Bay Development

	Millie Dupree's husband, Hoppy, owned a struggling real estate agency in Biloxi. He worked hard with the little business that came his way. Somehow he took care of his family - his wife, Millie, and their five kids.

	Just before six on Thursday, a well-dressed young businessman entered the office and asked for Mr. Dupree. His business card showed him to be Todd Ringwald of KLX Property Group, from Las Vegas, Nevada. His company liked to work with smaller companies, he said, and Hoppy had been highly recommended. He showed Hoppy a map.

	"MGM Grand is coming here. But no one knows it yet. They're going to build the biggest casino on the Coast. Probably the middle of next year. We want this." On the map he pointed to a large area of land north-west of the proposed casino. Then he showed Hoppy an artist's drawing of the land labeled Stillwater Bay. There were office buildings, big homes, smaller homes, a dock, parks, a shopping mall, even a proposed high school.

	"The whole thing will cost thirty million dollars. These are just the first drawings. I'll show you more if you can come to our office in Las Vegas."

	Hoppy's knees shook and he took a deep breath. "What kind of help were you thinking about from us?"

	"First we need someone to arrange the purchase of the land, then we'll need a real estate firm to advertise and sell the whole development."

	"How much will the land cost?" asked Hoppy.

	"It's expensive. Five million dollars. But the sellers don't really want to sell, so we have to move in quickly. That's why we need a local agent."

	Ringwald watched as Hoppy calculated his normal 6 percent fee on the land sale. Three hundred thousand dollars! Hoppy's heart beat faster. And with the whole Stillwater Bay development, he could be a millionaire in five years.

	Ringwald said, "I'm assuming your fee is 8 percent. That's what we normally pay."

	"Of course," said Hoppy. His tongue was dry. From three hundred thousand dollars to four hundred thousand -just like that! "Who are the sellers?"

	"The property is in the sixth district. And the county supervisor is - "

	"Jimmy Hull Moke," Hoppy interrupted.

	"You know him?"

	"Everyone knows Jimmy Hull Moke. He's been in office for thirty years. Cleverest crook on the Coast. On a local level he controls everything."

	"Perhaps we should arrange a meeting with Mr. Moke?"

	"Meetings don't work. What Moke wants is cash. Lots of it. In secret."

	"He doesn't get caught?" asked Ringwald.

	"He's pretty bright. Those of us who work along the Coast know how he operates."

	"I think the first step is for you to talk to Mr. Moke."

	"I have a clean reputation," said Hoppy. For twenty-five years, he'd worked honestly. He wasn't going to change.

	"We don't expect you to get dirty." Ringwald paused. "We have ways of delivering what Mr. Moke wants. You won't have to touch it. In fact, you won't even know when anything happens."

	Hoppy liked it! Still, he felt cautious. He said he'd like to think about it.

	They chatted some more and said goodbye at eight. After Ringwald had left, Hoppy telephoned KLX. He spoke to Mr. Ringwald's assistant, Madeline, who explained that Mr. Ringwald was out of the office.

	So, KLX really did exist.

	***

	At 7:40 Thursday night, Lonnie Shaver had a message that George Teaker had called. He rang back and for the first ten minutes answered nothing except questions about the trial. Lonnie confessed that it had been a bad day for the defense, as Lawrence Krigler had made a big impression on all the jurors - all except Lonnie, of course.

	Teaker said that the folks in New York were worried. They were relieved that Lonnie was on the jury, and was reliable. He said that they needed to arrange the final details of Lonnie's new contract. He currently earned forty thousand dollars. SuperHouse would give him fifty thousand with some share options and an extra annual payment which might be twenty thousand dollars.

	An hour later, Lonnie stood at his window and told himself that he'd soon be earning seventy thousand dollars a year. Not bad for a kid whose father drove a milk truck.

	***

	On Thursday night, Hoppy Dupree slept little. The agreement with Jimmy Hull Moke worried him. He'd never before been involved with anything dishonest. He sat on his porch and thought. But just before dawn on Friday morning, he started to feel better. Surely Moke would know how not to get caught. Hoppy wouldn't get near the cash. He decided that he'd have a chat with Moke, and then report to Ringwald.

	On Friday morning, the Wall Street Journal printed an article about Krigler which said that he hadn't been a satisfactory employee and that there were mistakes in his research. The company denied that tobacco was addictive.

	The newspaper also said that Pynex shares had risen, then fallen.

	Judge Harkin read the story. He checked with Lou Dell that the jurors couldn't have seen it.

	***

	In court, the defense tried to look relaxed for the day after Krigler. It was important that they didn't seem bothered. They wore light-colored suits, and smiled at the jurors.

	"Why are they so happy?" whispered one of the jurors.

	"They want us to think everything is under control," whispered back Nicholas.

	Wendall Rohr called the next witness, Dr. Roger Bunch. He'd become famous ten years earlier, when he'd worked for the government and had been fiercely critical of the tobacco industry. Since leaving office, he'd continued to criticize smoking. He wanted to share his views with the jury. Cigarettes cause lung cancer, and cigarettes are addictive. Tobacco companies spend billions deceiving the public. They spend money on studies which claim that smoking is harmless. Bunch's study showed that cigarettes contain poisonous chemicals, and trash swept off the floor. He had the jury's attention.

	***

	Hoppy arranged to meet Jimmy Hull Moke at his office. He'd provided sandwiches and iced tea, but he was too nervous to eat anything himself. He showed Moke the drawing of the Stillwater Bay development and presented the project.

	"Who's doing this?" Moke asked.

	Hoppy had practiced his answer. He couldn't give a name, not at this point.

	Moke frowned. "There could be problems with zoning and planning. But, as you know, the supervisors make the final decisions."

	"My client is anxious to work with you."

	"You know I control everything in my district. If I want this approved, it will be. If I don't like it, it's dead."

	Hoppy nodded.

	Moke said, "You know, my son is a very fine consultant for projects like this."

	"I didn't know that. My client would love to work with your son." Ringwald wanted Hoppy to find out what Moke wanted. "How much might he charge for his services?"

	"A hundred thousand dollars." Hoppy didn't show any emotion. KLX had said the deal might cost up to two hundred thousand. "A penny less than that, and I'll kill the deal with one phone call."

	"I need to make a phone call," Hoppy said. He walked into the front room and rang Ringwald. He returned to his office. "It's OK," he said slowly. "My client will pay." It felt good to arrange this deal. KLX on one side, Moke on the other, and Hoppy in the middle, with no involvement.

	***

	On Friday afternoon, Fitch didn't attend the trial. Instead he continued to study the jury file from the Cimmino case, which he'd received three days earlier. Three hundred possible jurors had received a summons. One of them was a young man called David Lancaster. There was nothing strange in his file, except a note saying that when he appeared on the first day there was no record of his summons being issued. But he was able to show the relevant papers. One of the jury consultants had noticed that Lancaster seemed anxious to be on the jury. However, he wasn't selected.

	Fitch had learned that David Lancaster had disappeared from Allentown a month after the trial. By Wednesday night, Fitch was almost certain that David Lancaster was Nicholas Easter.

	Carl Nussman, Fitch's chief jury consultant, had looked through the papers of another tobacco trial in Oklahoma. One of the possible jurors there was a young white male called Perry Hirsch. He was almost selected for the jury, but missed it at the last moment. Soon afterward, he left town. Again, no one knew anything about him.

	Fitch and his staff stared at the photos of Hirsch, Lancaster, and Easter. The three faces were of the same person. After lunch, a handwriting expert analyzed their writing. He announced without any doubt, "Hirsch and Lancaster are the same people. Hirsch and Easter are the same people. Therefore Lancaster and Easter must be the same."

	"All three are the same," said Fitch, slowly.

	"That's correct. And he's very, very bright."

	***

	Marlee called Fitch late on Friday night in his hotel. No one outside his team knew where he was. The call was put through to the hotel's front desk, but the hotel was being paid a lot of money to protect Fitch's secrecy, so they couldn't admit that he was a guest. When Marlee called again, she was put through to Fitch, on his orders.

	"Hi, Fitch. Sorry to call so late."

	"No problem," he said. "How's your friend?"

	"Lonely. Tonight was the night for jurors' personal visits."

	"Why didn't you visit your lover?"

	"Who said we're lovers? I tell you, Fitch, Krigler really worked well for the plaintiff. They listened to every word."

	"Tell me some good news."

	"Rohr's worried."

	"What's worrying Rohr?" he asked, looking at his puzzled face in the mirror. He felt betrayed.

	"You. He knows you're trying to think up all kinds of ways to get to the jury."

	"How often do you talk to him?"

	"A lot. He's sweeter than you, Fitch. He doesn't tape my calls or send goons to follow me."

	"So Rohr knows how to charm a girl?"

	"Yes, but he hasn't got as much money as you."

	"How much of my money do you want?"

	"Later, Fitch. I must run. There's a suspicious-looking car across the street. It must be some of your goons."

	Fitch showered and tried to sleep. At 2 A.M. he drove to the casino. By dawn, he'd won nearly twenty thousand dollars.



	Chapter seven

	A Fire

	The first Saturday in November was unusually cool for the near- tropical climate of the Coast. The jurors, accompanied by Lou Dell and her husband, five part-time deputies, and two other court officials, went by private bus to New Orleans. They shopped at outdoor markets, bought souvenirs, and at four went on a sightseeing trip on a boat.

	They were back home at ten, tired and ready for sleep.

	***

	Early that same morning, Hoppy was just making coffee when he heard the doorbell. Two young men stood on the doorstep. When Hoppy heard "FBI," he nearly fainted.

	"Mr. Dupree," Agent Nitchman said when the introductions were completed. "We'd like to ask you some questions."

	"About what?" Hoppy asked, his voice dry.

	"Questions about Stillwater Bay, Jimmy Hull Moke, things like that," Nitchman explained.

	Hoppy grabbed the door, "Oh, my God," he said.

	"May we come in?" Agent Napier said.

	"No please, not here." The children! "My office, please."

	There were no sounds from upstairs. The kids were still sleeping. He dressed fast, and thought about calling Todd Ringwald, or his lawyer. He thought of the public shame. How could he have been so stupid?

	Nitchman started. "Are you familiar with Stillwater Bay?"

	"Yes."

	"Have you met a man by the name of Todd Ringwald?"

	"Yes."

	"Have you signed any kind of contract with him?"

	"No."

	"What was the purpose of your meeting with Jimmy Hull Moke?"

	"To discuss the development of Stillwater Bay."

	Napier cleared his throat. "We've been investigating Mr. Moke for the last six months. We agreed to make things easier for him if he helped us. Did you offer money to Mr. Moke?"

	"No," Hoppy said. He hadn't actually offered money. He'd made it possible for his client, Mr. Ringwald, to offer money.

	Nitchman took out a pocket tape recorder and put it on the table. "Sure?" he asked. He pressed a button. Hoppy held his breath. Then, there was his voice and then Moke's.

	Hoppy stared at the tape recorder, defeated. When he finally looked at them, his eyes were red. "So what will happen to me?"

	"For trying to bribe a government official? I'd say three to five years in prison."

	The microphone had been hidden in a pen, which was sitting in a jar with other pens and pencils on Hoppy's desk. Ringwald had put it there on Friday morning, when Hoppy had left his office briefly. From the desk, the recording had been sent to a van, recorded onto tape and delivered to Fitch's office. Moke, of course, wasn't involved; he was simply behaving like he always did, trying to make money from bribes. Ringwald, Napier, and Nitchman all worked for a security firm that Fitch often used. The Hoppy scam would cost The Fund eighty thousand dollars, a tiny amount for them.

	Hoppy mentioned legal representation. But it was important that Hoppy didn't talk to a lawyer, who'd want names and addresses.

	"We know you're not a crook," Nitchman said softly.

	"You just made a mistake," added Napier. "Let's keep this quiet for twenty-four hours. We need time to think about your situation. There may be a way out for you, Mr. Dupree. We'll meet here tomorrow at nine o'clock in the morning."

	"It's a deal," said Hoppy.

	***

	Since the Hoppy scam was going well, Fitch decided to act. Early Sunday morning, Pang and Dubaz, another of Fitch's employees, dressed as workmen, broke into Nicholas's apartment. Dubaz went straight to the camera hidden above the refrigerator, and removed it.

	Pang managed to remove the back of the computer and take out what he needed, while Dubaz searched for more computer disks. It didn't take long.

	"Let's go," said Pang.

	They threw the computer onto the sofa, and covered it with pillows and clothing. Then they poured lighter fuel on top, walked to the door, and Dubaz threw a match onto the heap.

	When the flames were near the ceiling, they left quickly, locking the door behind them. Downstairs, they pulled a fire alarm. Then they began banging on the front doors of the other apartments. There were screams as people came out into the hallways.

	"Make damn sure you don't kill anyone," Fitch had warned them.

	As the crowd went out into the parking lot, Pang and Dubaz separated. When the firemen arrived, they disappeared. No one died and no one was injured. Four apartments were destroyed, eleven badly damaged.

	***

	Easter's computer disks were almost impossible to read. They were so secure that Fitch's computer experts were defeated. However, they did manage to read one disk. On it there were current news items about the tobacco industry, information about other legal cases, and a poem about rivers. It was impossible to decide whether Easter was sympathetic to smokers, or just interested in the law.

	Finally they found a two-page letter to Easter's mother, a Mrs. Pamela Blanchard, in Gardner, Texas. In it, he apologized for not writing sooner, and said he'd found a job in a casino. Although he still thought about being a lawyer, he doubted he'd ever return to his law studies. He signed the letter Love Jeff. Fitch immediately sent two people by private plane to Gardner.

	There was one other important piece of information: a list of people registered to vote in Harrison County. From A through K, there were 16,000 names and addresses. The list itself wasn't secret. But two things about it were odd. First, it was on a disk, which meant that somehow Easter had managed to steal the information from a court computer. Second, why did Easter need it?

	Fitch knew that Easter was quite capable of altering the list to have his own name entered as a possible juror in the Wood Vs Pynex case.

	***

	Hoppy's eyes were red and swollen as he drank coffee at his desk early on Sunday morning. At nine, Napier and Nitchman entered with a third, older man. He was introduced as George Cristano, from Washington, Department of Justice. His handshake was cold.

	"Hoppy, could we have this little chat elsewhere?"

	They left town in a big black Lincoln Town Car and drove to a dock near Bay St. Louis. Hoppy followed Cristano onto a boat named Afternoon Delight.

	"Sit down, Hoppy," said Cristano. The boat rocked slightly. Cristano sat opposite Hoppy. "I'll be brief. We have a deal for you which means that you can walk away. No arrest, no trial, and no prison. In fact, Hoppy, no one will ever know."

	"I'm listening," interrupted Hoppy.

	"This deal has nothing to do with the law. It's political. There'll be no record of it in Washington. Are you worried about crime and drugs, Hoppy?"

	"Of course."

	"Everything's political these days. We're constantly fighting with the government and with the President. Do you know what we need in Washington? We need more good Republicans who'll give us money and keep out of our way. The Democrats are always talking about budget cuts and the rights of criminals. We have to protect our friends, Hoppy, and you can help us." Cristano paused and looked up and down the dock. He leaned closer. "Your wife can help."

	"Millie?"

	"It's the trial, Hoppy. Guess who gives most money to Republican candidates? The tobacco companies. They give millions of dollars because they're annoyed by government rules.

	They believe people should be free to smoke if they want to. If they lose this trial, there'll be a flood of lawsuits. The companies will lose millions of dollars, and so we'll lose millions of dollars in Washington. Can you help us, Hoppy?"

	"Sure, I guess, but how?"

	"Talk to your wife and make her see that this case is dangerous. She needs to stand up against the liberals who might want a big verdict for the plaintiff. Can you do that?"

	"Of course I can. I'll see her tonight, in fact."

	They talked about the best way to persuade Millie. Hoppy asked what would happen if Millie voted with the tobacco company, but the rest of the jury disagreed. Cristano promised that if Millie voted correctly, everything would be all right.

	Hoppy almost danced along the dock as he returned to the car. He was a new man.

	***

	Judge Harkin wouldn't allow the jurors to go to their different churches on Sunday. Instead, he arranged for a service to be held at the Siesta Motel. At two, relatives started arriving with clean clothes for the jurors. As Easter had no close relatives in the area, Willis drove him to his apartment.

	The fire had been out for some hours. The narrow front garden and sidewalk were full of burnt items and wet clothing. Neighbors were cleaning up. Nicholas felt weak at the knees. He walked to the first group of people.

	"When did this happen?" he asked.

	"This morning, about eight," a woman answered. "Do you live here?"

	"Yes, Easter, m 312."

	"It's totally destroyed. That's probably where the fire started."

	The security guard led Nicholas up the steps to the second floor. There was nothing left of his apartment, except the kitchen wall. No furniture and, to his horror, no computer.

	***

	Sunday evening from 6 P.M. was personal visits. Hoppy arrived first and started to talk about the trial to Millie. Nicholas managed to leave the jurors' wing of the motel unnoticed, and went up to the second floor, where Marlee had booked a room.

	Marlee and Nicholas had first met in Lawrence, Kansas, where she worked as a waitress and he was at law school. Marlee's mother had died a few years previously and she'd inherited almost two hundred thousand dollars. They fell in love. Nicholas hated studying law, and finally left law school. In their four years together they'd traveled to half a dozen countries. They'd also followed tobacco trials, staying in places such as Allentown, and now, Biloxi. Together they knew more about nicotine, lung cancer, jury selection, and Rankin Fitch than any group of experts.

	***

	Rohr spent Sunday evening meeting with the other trial lawyers who'd each given a million dollars toward fighting this case. They were discussing how many more witnesses for the plaintiff should be called. The trial was now three weeks old. Rohr had enough experts to continue for at least two more weeks. Although Cable had his experts, defense witnesses normally took less than half the time of the plaintiff.

	However, this tobacco trial was unique because of the sequestered jury, and at some point this jury would rebel. The lawyers argued for an hour. Rohr thought that the jury had heard enough and he wanted to use only two more witnesses. Other lawyers disagreed, quoting evidence from the jury consultants. Rohr felt he could understand the jury better himself.



	Chapter eight

	Family Backgrounds

	Nicholas had a private meeting with Judge Harkin on Monday morning. He assured him that he was fine, in spite of the fire. He was just a student, with little to lose, except a fine computer and some good security equipment.

	Since they were alone, Harkin asked him how the other jurors were. It would have been more appropriate if the lawyers had been present. But he could trust this kid.

	"Everything's fine," Nicholas said.

	"Is the case being discussed?"

	"No. When we're together, we try not to talk about it."

	"Good, let me know if there's a problem. And let's not talk about this meeting to anyone."

	"Sure," said Nicholas. They shook hands and he left.

	Rohr's next witness was Leon Robilio. He was led into the courtroom through a side door. A deputy helped him sit down. He was old and pale, dressed in a dark suit, white shirt, and no tie. He had a hole in his throat, covered with a bandage and hidden under a white scarf. When he swore to tell the truth, he did so by holding a pencil-like microphone to his throat. His voice was flat. He was a victim of throat cancer; he'd lost part of his throat eight years earlier, and had learned to talk in this way. He'd smoked heavily for almost forty years and his habit had almost killed him.

	The jury quickly became accustomed to Robilio's mechanical voice. He told them that he'd worked for twenty years for the tobacco industry. He'd left the job when he got cancer and when he realized that, even with the disease, he couldn't stop smoking. He was addicted. He still worked full time, but now was fiercely critical of smoking. In his previous job he'd seen a lot of studies of cigarettes and the tobacco industry. He referred to Krigler's evidence.

	Robilio regretted many things that he'd done when he promoted the tobacco industry. But he most regretted his denials that the industry aimed its advertising at teenagers. "We spent millions studying kids. We knew that they could name the three most advertised brands of cigarettes. We knew that almost 90 percent of the kids under eighteen who smoked preferred the top three advertised brands. So what did the companies do? They increased the advertising."

	"Did you know how much money the tobacco companies were making from cigarette sales to children?" Rohr asked.

	"About two hundred million dollars a year. The tobacco companies know that 3,000 kids start smoking every day and that nearly all adult smokers start as teenagers. So they have to target young kids. They know that one-third of the 3,000 kids who start smoking today will die from their addiction."

	The jury was fascinated by Robilio.

	Rohr took a few steps forward. Then he asked, "How did you answer the arguments that nicotine is addictive?"

	"I helped the tobacco companies think of the answer. It goes something like this: 'Smokers choose the habit. So it's a matter of choice. Cigarettes aren't addictive, but, even if they are, no one forces anyone to smoke.' I used to make this argument sound good. The trouble is, it's not true."

	"Why isn't it true?"

	"Because the issue is addiction and an addict can't make choices. And kids become addicted quicker than adults."

	Hoppy came to the trial that Monday morning, for the first time. Millie was thrilled to see him. His sudden interest in the trial was strange, however; he'd talked about nothing else for four hours the night before.

	After a coffee break, Cable started to question Robilio for the defense. He started well when Robilio admitted that he was being paid for attending at court. Cable then tried to make Robilio lose his temper. He asked Robilio about his children, who'd all smoked, and reminded him about the work the industry was doing to stop teenagers smoking.

	Robilio wasn't persuaded. "The industry will spend a little money to look responsible. But they do that because they know the truth. If they spend two billion dollars next year advertising cigarettes, more young people will become addicted. And you're a fool if you don't believe this."

	Judge Harkin leaned forward. "Mr. Robilio, that is unnecessary."

	"Sorry, Your Honor. And sorry to you, Mr. Cable. You're just doing your job. It's your client I hate."

	"Why?" Cable immediately regretted asking the question. "Because these tobacco people are clever. They're bright, intelligent, educated, and dishonest. They'll tell you that cigarettes aren't addictive. And they know it's a lie."

	"No further questions," said Cable.

	***

	Nicholas was silent during lunch. He avoided glances and looked sad. The mood was generally serious. The jurors could still hear Leon Robilio's mechanical voice. Three thousand kids start to smoke each day. One-third of these will die from their addiction.

	One of the jurors asked Jerry Fernandez, "How old were you when you started smoking?"

	"Fourteen."

	"Why did you start?"

	"The Marlboro Man." The jurors thought of the image in the advertisement. The cowboy on the horse, the hat, the snow on the mountains behind. Why would a young boy of fourteen not want to be the Marlboro Man?

	"Are you addicted?" Rikki Coleman asked Jerry.

	"I don't know," he said. "I guess I could stop. I've tried to stop a few times. Sure, it would be nice to stop."

	"You don't enjoy it?" Rikki asked.

	"Oh, there are times when a cigarette is just what I want, but I smoke two packs a day now, and that's too much."

	"I was sixteen when I started," Sylvia admitted.

	"I started at fourteen," Herman offered. "Gave up when I was forty."

	"Did anybody start smoking after the age of eighteen?"

	Not a word.

	***

	Nitchman met Hoppy for a sandwich. Hoppy was nervous about being seen in public with an FBI agent, and was relieved when Nitchman arrived wearing jeans. Nitchman handed Hoppy a piece of paper. He said it had just come from Cristano at the Justice Department. In fact, the document had been written by two of Fitch's people.

	It was a faxed copy of a report on Leon Robilio. Hoppy read it quickly while eating French fries. Robilio was being paid half a million dollars to testify. He'd been fired from his job for dishonesty, he had a history of mental illness, and his throat cancer was probably the result of his alcohol abuse.

	"Really?" Hoppy said, his mouth full of potatoes.

	"Mr. Cristano thought you should somehow give this to your wife," Nitchman said. "She should only show it to people she can trust on the jury."

	"Right." Hoppy folded the paper and put it in a pocket.

	***

	Nicholas's mother, Pamela Blanchard, lived in the old part of Gardner. She was married to the president of a local bank. He wasn't the father of Nicholas or Jeff or whoever he was. She had two sons by a previous marriage which ended in divorce. One was in Alaska, one was a lawyer, or studying to be a lawyer. Something like that.

	Fitch's people finally found a college teacher who told them that Jeff Kerr had gone to law school in Kansas. Fitch arranged for a local security firm to start searching Lawrence, Kansas for any trace of Jeff Kerr.

	They discovered that Jeff Kerr had registered as a law student, but didn't receive a degree. A local investigator found a lawyer who'd been a student with Jeff and went to see him. The lawyer, Tom Ratliff, said he hadn't seen Jeff in four years. Jeff had left law school because he suddenly hated the idea of being a lawyer. Also, he fell in love.

	"Who was the woman?"

	"Claire. She worked in a bar, Mulligan's. I heard that he and Claire left town, but I never heard from him again."

	Employment records at Mulligan's gave her full name: Claire Clement.

	***

	On Monday afternoon in court, an economist gave some information about Jacob Wood's finances. He told the court what Mr. Wood's salary was when he died, and calculated how much his future earnings would have been. One of the defense lawyers tried to challenge the figures. But the lost salary was just the beginning. Rohr would add pain and suffering, medical care, and the price of the funeral.

	An hour before the end of the day, Rohr announced his last witness, Mrs. Celeste Wood. The jury hadn't realized that the plaintiff was almost finished. Several of them smiled. Tonight would be their seventh night in sequestration. According to Nicholas's theory, the defense would take no more than three days. They did the math. They could be home by the weekend!

	Celeste Wood was fifty-five, thin, with short gray hair. She worked for a library and had brought up three children. She'd practiced what she was going to say and she answered Rohr's questions easily. She talked about her husband, kids, and grandchildren. Her husband had wanted to stop smoking, but he couldn't. The addiction was too strong.

	Cable didn't question her. What could he ask?

	Judge Harkin looked at his jury. They were tired. "Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "I have good news and bad. The good news is obvious. The plaintiff is calling no more witnesses. The defense has fewer witnesses. The bad news is that the lawyers and I have to deal with other business concerning the trial. We'll have to do that tomorrow, probably all day."

	Nicholas raised his hand. "You mean we have to sit around at the motel all day tomorrow?"

	"I'm afraid so."

	"I don't understand why."

	"What do you want to do?"

	"We could hire a big boat and go fishing."

	"I can't ask the taxpayers to pay for that, Mr. Easter."

	"I'm sure that the lawyers wouldn't mind paying."

	Rohr answered first, "We'd be happy to pay half."

	"It's a great idea, Judge," said Cable loudly.

	Nicholas put up his hand again. "Excuse me, Your Honor, maybe some jurors would prefer to shop in New Orleans."

	No problem. Rohr and Cable would divide the costs.

	***

	Rohr and his team had presented ten witnesses to the jury, including the video of Jacob Wood. It had taken thirteen days. If the jury hadn't been sequestered, Rohr would have called at least three more experts, but he knew it was time to stop. This was no ordinary jury, with a blind man as foreman, at least two strikes, and lists of demands.

	The jury didn't seem ordinary to Fitch, either. He had huge experience of influencing juries. Things were going well. Only one fire, and no broken bones. But Marlee had changed everything. With her, he could purchase a verdict. In this, the biggest tobacco trial ever, his lovely Marlee would hand him a verdict. A victory over Rohr in Biloxi would make future litigation much more difficult. It might even save the industry.

	When Fitch counted the jury's votes, he thought there were four jurors with him and one that could go either way. Another would probably vote against the tobacco companies. That left Easter and the remaining five, who'd vote with Easter. Nine votes were needed by either side for a verdict, or the trial would have to take place again.

	In his office, Rohr was sure that he had nine votes.



	Chapter nine

	Buying a Verdict

	In Lawrence, Kansas, Fitch's local investigator tried too hard. Small spoke to a girl called Rebecca, who'd worked at Mulligan's with Claire Clement. Small went to see her in the bank where she worked.

	"Didn't you work with Claire Clement a few years ago?" Small asked.

	"Maybe. Who wants to know?"

	"Do you know where she is now?"

	"No. Why are you asking?"

	"Well, she's a possible juror in a trial. My firm has been asked to investigate her background."

	"Where's the trial?"

	"Can't tell you. You worked at Mulligan's, right?"

	"Yes. That was a long time ago."

	"Have you talked to her recently?"

	"Not in the last four years. Now please, I'm very busy, and you're wasting your time."

	When Small had gone, Rebecca rang the number of an apartment in St. Louis, and left a recorded message for her friend, Claire. They chatted at least once a month, though they hadn't seen each other in a year. Claire and Jeff lived an odd life, never staying long in one place. Only the apartment in St. Louis stayed the same. Claire had warned Rebecca that people might come and ask difficult questions. She'd hinted that she and Jeff were working for the government.

	When Marlee checked her messages at the St. Louis apartment, she was worried. She called Rebecca and managed to sound perfectly normal, though her mouth was dry. Rebecca was able to remember the whole conversation.

	"Are you OK?" Rebecca asked her friend.

	"Oh, we're fine," Marlee assured her. They said goodbye to each other, and promised to keep in contact.

	Neither Marlee nor Nicholas had believed they'd be traced to Lawrence. Who'd found them? Which side, Fitch or Rohr? More likely Fitch, because he was smarter and had more money. What had been their mistake? How much did these people know? She needed to speak to Nicholas, but he was on a boat with his fellow jurors.

	***

	Fitch was in the office when the call came.

	"Hello, Marlee," he said to the girl of his dreams.

	"Hey, Fitch. What are the chances of a meeting without your goons hiding behind the bushes?"

	"The chances are excellent."

	"You're lying. Let's do it this way. Let's meet and talk, and if my people see your people, this is the end."

	"It's a deal."

	"I'm at Casella's, a seafood restaurant at the end of the Biloxi dock. I'm waiting."

	When Fitch arrived at the restaurant, Marlee was sitting at a wooden table with an umbrella above it. She was wearing jeans, sunglasses, and a fishing cap.

	"I got a call from Lawrence this morning," she said, and Fitch swallowed. "It seems you have some goons up there trying to find things out."

	"I don't know what you're talking about." Fitch didn't sound very certain.

	So it was Fitch! His eyes betrayed him!

	"Right. One more phone call like that, and you'll never hear my voice again." She said nothing for a moment.

	"Fine, whatever you want. I just wish I knew what you were talking about," said Fitch. She was silent for a moment. Then finally, Fitch said, "When do we stop playing games?"

	"Now."

	"Wonderful. How much money do you want?"

	"I'll name a price later. It depends on what you want. The jury can do one of four things. It can deliver a verdict for the plaintiff. It can split down the middle, and there will have to be a retrial. It can vote nine to three in your favor and you have a huge victory. It can vote twelve to zero in your favor, and you and your clients can relax for several years."

	"I know all this."

	"Of course you do. If we forget a verdict for the plaintiff, then you have three choices."

	"What can you deliver?"

	"Anything I want. Including a verdict for the plaintiff."

	"So the other side is willing to pay?"

	"We're talking."

	"Tell me how the deal works."

	"It's very simple. We agree on the verdict you want. Then we agree on the price. You get your money ready. We wait until the lawyers finish their closing arguments, and the jury withdraws to discuss the case. At that moment I give you instructions about which bank you send the money to. When the bank confirms they've received the money, the jury delivers your verdict."

	"But there's no guarantee!" he protested.

	She leaned forward. "Do you doubt me, Fitch?"

	Fitch would pay. He'd decided a week earlier to pay whatever she wanted, and he knew that when the money left The Fund there were no guarantees. He didn't care, he trusted his Marlee. He'd love to ask her lots of questions, but he knew she wouldn't answer. He also knew she'd deliver his verdict. She'd worked too hard to fail.

	"I'm not totally helpless in this, you know," he said, trying to look in control.

	"Of course not, Fitch. I know you've laid traps for at least four of the jurors. Shall I name them?"

	No, he didn't want her to name them. How did he know if she was telling the truth? It simply wasn't fair.

	"I feel you doubt whether I'm in control. What if I get a juror removed from the jury, say, Lonnie Shaver?"

	Fitch tried not to react. "No, he's harmless. I think we should keep Lonnie. But I can't agree a deal without details."

	Without any hesitation she said, "And I'm not agreeing to anything as long as you keep investigating my past."

	"Are you hiding something?"

	"No, but I don't like getting phone calls from my friends. One more call, and I'll never speak to you again."

	"Don't say that."

	"I mean it, Fitch. Stop your people. If you don't, I'll talk to Rohr. He might want to do a deal. A verdict for him means you have no job, and your clients lose billions. You can't afford it, Fitch." She was right about that. "I'm hungry," she said. "I'll call you in a couple of days."

	"I'm hungry too," he said.

	"No thanks, I'll eat alone."

	***

	The boat traveled eighty kilometers from the coast, where half the jury started fishing. One of the jurors, Angel Weese, got sick but recovered with the help of some medicine and actually caught the first big fish. Nicholas and Jerry had decided to chat to Lonnie Shaver. Nicholas was friendly with Jerry, who sometimes agreed to say what Nicholas wanted him to. It was a game to him; he had no idea what Nicholas was really doing. They made sure that Lonnie had a supply of cold beer, and after a few cans he talked more easily.

	"I wonder how many experts the defense will call," Nicholas said.

	"They don't have to call any," Lonnie said, staring at the sea.

	"You've had enough?" Nicholas said.

	"Damned ridiculous. A man smokes for thirty-five years, then wants millions for his family after he kills himself."

	"Jerry and I thought that you would support the defense," Nicholas said.

	"And what about you?" Lonnie asked.

	"Me, I'm still open-minded. Jerry's leaning toward the defense, because he's addicted to nicotine. He thinks he can stop smoking if he really wants to, so Jacob Wood should have stopped long before he got cancer. Right?"

	"That's about right," Jerry said.

	The boat returned soon after five. Its arrival was reported to Fitch. He was in his office with one of his people, Swanson, replacing the goons that had annoyed Marlee with another firm who guaranteed not to get caught. Swanson was going to Kansas City to direct operations. Fitch couldn't lose Marlee, but he had to know who she was. There was something hidden in her past.

	Angel Weese was in love with and planned to marry Derrick Maples, a young man who was between jobs and between wives. He was in the process of divorcing his first wife. They had two young children, and his wife and her lawyer wanted six hundred dollars a month. The situation wasn't good.

	Angel was two months' pregnant, though she'd told no one except Derrick.

	Derrick's brother Marvis had once been a deputy sheriff and was now a part-time minister. Marvis was approached by a man named Cleve, who said he'd like to meet Derrick. Introductions were made. Cleve was known as a runner. He ran cases for Wendall Rohr. His usual task was to find good death and injury claims and make sure that they went to Rohr's office. Cleve had to work carefully; looking for clients like this wasn't considered acceptable behavior. On his business card, he was called an "Investigator."

	Over a beer, Cleve talked to Derrick and quickly realized that he had financial problems. He started asking questions about Angel and the trial.

	"Why don't you tell me what this is about?" Derrick asked.

	"My client is willing to purchase influence. For cash. Five thousand dollars. Half now, half after the trial."

	Derrick smiled. "And I do what?"

	"You talk with Angel when you see her during personal visits and you make sure she knows how important this case is to the plaintiff. Just don't tell her about the money, or about me, or any of this. Not now. Maybe later."

	"Why not?"

	"Because this is illegal, OK? If the Judge found out that I was talking to you, offering you money to talk to Angel, then both of us would go to jail. Understand?"

	"Ten thousand. Five now, five when the trial is over."

	"OK, ten."

	Durwood Cable was in charge of keeping D. Martin Jankle away from any alcohol. Fitch and Jankle had fought over the question of whether or not Jankle could drink on the night before he testified. Fitch accused Jankle of having a drink problem. Jankle cursed Fitch for trying to tell him, the CEO of Pynex, if, when, and how much he could drink.

	Cable got involved in the argument. He insisted that Jankle stay in his office to prepare his testimony, and then practice it. Jankle performed adequately. Nothing special. Cable made him watch a video of his performance. When he was finally taken to his hotel after ten, he found that Fitch had replaced the alcoholic drinks in his room with juices. He cursed and went to his overnight bag, where he kept a bottle hidden in a leather case. Fitch had removed that too.

	***

	At 1 A.M. Nicholas silently opened his motel room door and looked up and down the hall. The guard was gone, probably asleep, Marlee was waiting in a room on the second floor. They kissed. She hurriedly told him about her chat with Rebecca in Lawrence, then she tried to recall every word of her conversation with Fitch.

	They were both shocked to realize that they'd been partly discovered. They were sure it was Fitch, and they wondered how much he knew. They were certain that Jeff Kerr would have to be discovered in order to find Claire Clement. Although Jeffs background was harmless, Claire's had to be protected, or they wouldn't be able to continue with their plan.

	There was little that they could do except wait.

	Derrick entered Angel's room through the window. He couldn't wait until tomorrow night, he told her, because he loved her and missed her. She noticed he'd been drinking.

	They awoke at dawn, and Angel was nervous because she had a man in her room and this was against the Judge's orders. Derrick wasn't worried. He'd been thinking and he'd decided that Angel's vote was worth a lot more than ten thousand dollars. He'd suggest to Cleve that they paid him cash now, and then a percentage of the money granted to the plaintiff after the verdict. There would never be a chance like this for him again.



	Chapter ten

	The Case for the Defense

	On Wednesday morning, an analyst named Walter Barker wrote in an article in Mogul, a popular weekly financial magazine, that the jury would decide against Pynex and that the sum of money Pynex would have to pay out would be enormous. His opinions were listened to, and he was usually right. Wall Street was shocked. The share price dropped from seventy-six to seventy- one and a half.

	The jury arrived in court at nine. Harkin welcomed them, went through his normal questions, and then promised that there would be a speedy end to the trial.

	Jankle was called as a witness, and the defense began. Free from the effects of alcohol, Jankle was ready. He smiled and seemed to welcome the chance to defend his tobacco company. Sitting on the second row was Taunton, the black lawyer whom Lonnie had met in Charlotte. It didn't take long for their eyes to meet. Lonnie managed to nod and smile, because it seemed like the polite thing to do. Taunton's message was clear. The defense was speaking, and it was important for Lonnie to understand that he should believe every word that was said by the witness. No problem with Lonnie.

	Jankle described the different brands of cigarettes his company made, showing the jury a colorful chart of the eight brands, each with the nicotine levels labeled beside it. By offering this wide selection of brands, Pynex allowed each person to decide how much nicotine he or she wanted. Choose the number of cigarettes you smoke each day. Choose what you do to your body with cigarettes. The message was choice, choice, choice. Cigarettes were responsible products if used carefully. However, like many other products - alcohol, butter, sugar, and handguns, for example - they could become dangerous if they were abused.

	Fitch watched all of Jankle's testimony from a seat near the back. To his right was Luther Vandemeer, CEO of Trellco, the largest tobacco company in the world, and the unofficial head of the Big Four. Fitch and Vandemeer had lunch at Mahoneys, alone. They were relieved by Jankle's success that morning, but they knew the trial would become more difficult.

	"How much influence do you have with the jury?" asked Vandemeer.

	Fitch wasn't going to answer truthfully. He wasn't expected to. No one knew some of the things he did, except his own agents.

	"The usual."

	"Maybe the usual is not enough." Vandemeer was scared, with good reason. The pressure was enormous. A large plaintiff's verdict would mean an immediate 20 percent loss in shareholder value, and that was just the beginning. There could be one million lung cancer lawsuits during the five years after such a verdict. The legal fees would average one million dollars for each case. Nobody dared predict the cost of one million verdicts. The government might try to ban cigarettes.

	"Do you have enough money?" Vandemeer asked.

	"I think so," answered Fitch, wondering for the hundredth time how much his dear Marlee might want.

	"The Fund should have a lot of money."

	"It does."

	Vandemeer chewed on a tiny piece of grilled chicken. "Why don't you choose nine jurors and give them a million dollars each?" he said with a little laugh, as if he was joking.

	"Believe me, I've thought about it. It's just too risky. People would go to jail."

	Vandemeer stopped smiling. "We have to win, Rankin, you understand? We have to win. Spend whatever it takes."

	***

	With a jury exhausted by sequestration, Durwood Cable didn't want to extend the case. He'd cut his list of witnesses to five, and he'd planned for their testimony to run for no more than four days.

	In the afternoon, Jankle was questioned by Wendall Rohr. Rohr started with a vicious question, and things went from bad to worse.

	"Isn't it true, Mr. Jankle, that your company spends hundreds of millions of dollars trying to persuade people to smoke, but when they get sick, your company won't pay a dime to help them?" Jankle said something that no one could hear.

	"I'm sorry, Mr. Jankle. I didn't hear that. When was the last time - "

	"I heard the question. I can't recall one."

	"So you say that cigarettes don't cause sickness?"

	"Only if they're abused."

	"So tell us please, Mr. Jankle, how does one abuse a cigarette?"

	"By smoking too much."

	"And how much is too much?"

	"I'd say more than two packs a day."

	Rohr spoke more softly. "Will you describe to the jury how you have warned the public that smoking more than forty cigarettes a day is dangerous?"

	The damage was done, but Rohr saved the best moment until the end. He showed a video of Jankle, together with the other CEOs, giving evidence before a group of politicians. One by one they were asked if nicotine was addictive. They all clearly said no. Jankle was last, and when he made his angry denial, the jury knew he was lying.

	***

	Fitch and Cable had a tense meeting. Fitch was bothered about Jankle's defense. Cable, who didn't like being criticized by a nonlawyer, whom he hated anyway, explained that they'd begged Jankle not to talk about cigarette abuse.

	Fitch thought the jury might be tired of Cable. Why couldn't another defense lawyer talk to a few witnesses? There were a lot of them. Fitch and Cable shouted at each other across a desk. After they'd both tried to become calmer, they did agree that the defense should be brief, and last no more than three days. Fitch banged the door shut as he left the office.

	In his car, Fitch read faxes. There was a summary of the investigations into Claire Clement in Kansas. The car went past a store, and Fitch suddenly wanted a beer. He was an ex-alcoholic and hadn't had a drink for nine years. He knew that if he had one drink, he'd go on drinking. He stopped thinking about beer. Where was Marlee, and why hadn't she called? He closed his eyes, thought of the jurors, and dreamed of Marlee.

	***

	Derrick chose a different place for his meeting with Cleve. It was a bar in the black section of Biloxi. Cleve insisted that they meet in the parking lot first. He arrived late.

	"I don't think this is a good idea," Cleve said. "I'm the only white face here, and you expect me to go into the bar with five thousand dollars and hand it over to you? If you want the money, meet me at the Waffle House."

	Sitting in the Waffle House, they drank coffee. Derrick was nervous as he spoke.

	"So I'm thinking that ten thousand dollars isn't enough, know what I mean?"

	"I thought we had a deal," said Cleve, showing no emotion.

	"Things are different now. I want fifty thousand dollars, plus a percentage of the sum of money that the plaintiff gets. I think 10 percent would be fair."

	"Oh, you do? You're crazy. We made a deal for ten thousand. Anything larger and we'll be caught." Cleve got up and hurried out to the parking lot.

	Derrick ran after him and caught up with Cleve in his car. Cleve got out, lit a cigarette, and looked at Derrick.

	"Look, what I'm offering you is illegal. Don't get greedy. If you do, you'll be caught."

	"But if you offer a percentage, Angel will work harder to persuade the other jurors to decide on a large sum of money."

	"You don't understand. If there's a verdict for the plaintiff, it'll be years before the money is actually paid. Take the money. Talk to Angel."

	"Twenty-five thousand. Per vote."

	"Per vote?"

	"Sure. Angel can deliver more than one."

	Cleve finished his cigarette. "I'll have to talk to my boss."

	***

	It was time for personal visits at the Siesta Motel. Hoppy had arrived early with some Chinese food and a bottle of wine. He and Millie made love, and then talked about the kids. Hoppy spoke sadly about her absence. Everyone missed her.

	He dressed and turned on the television. "You're not going to believe this," he said, taking a piece of paper out of his pocket.

	"What is it?" said Millie, taking the paper and reading it. It was a copy of the document which Fitch's people had written, with false information about Leon Robilio. Millie looked suspiciously at her husband. "Where did you get this?" she demanded. "Who sent it?"

	"Don't know. Looks like it came from Washington." Hoppy hated lying to Millie, but Napier and Nitchman were out there somewhere, just waiting.

	"Why didn't you just throw it away?"

	"I don't know, I - "

	"You know it's wrong to show me stuff like this, Hoppy." Millie threw the paper on the bed and walked closer to her husband. "What are you trying to do?"

	"Nothing. Somebody just faxed it to my office, that's all."

	"What? Somebody knew your fax number, knew that your wife was on the jury, knew that Leon Robilio testified? And that person also thought that you'd be stupid enough to try to influence me? I want to know what's going on."

	"Nothing, I swear," said Hoppy.

	"Why have you taken such a sudden interest in the case? I can tell when something's bothering you, Hoppy."

	"Nothing. Relax. This case is difficult for both of us. I'm sorry I showed you it."

	Millie finished the wine and sat on the bed. Hoppy sat next to her. Mr. Cristano had suggested that Millie showed the document to all of her friends on the jury. Hoppy didn't know how to tell Mr. Cristano that this wouldn't happen. As he thought about this, Millie started crying. "I want to go home," she said, with red eyes.

	Hoppy put his arm round her and squeezed tightly. "I'm sorry," he said. She cried even harder.

	Hoppy felt like crying too. The meeting hadn't been successful. The trial would end soon. He had to persuade Millie to vote for a defense verdict. Hoppy would be forced to tell Millie the truth. Not tonight, but surely during the next personal visit.



	Chapter eleven

	A Juror's Dismissal

	Colonel Herrera's routine never varied. He got up at exactly five-thirty, did his exercises, and took a cold shower. At six he had breakfast in the motel dining room. At eight, he returned to his room.

	At 6:15 on Thursday morning, Nicholas greeted the Colonel in the dining room, and had a brief conversation about the weather. He then went quietly down the hall, took a pile of newspapers from a drawer in his room, and used a key he'd stolen from the front desk to enter the Colonel's room. He put the pile of newspapers and magazines under the Colonel's bed. One was a copy of yesterday's Mogul. He went to his room and phoned Marlee.

	Marlee called Fitch. "Hey, Fitch. Go to the middle pay phone at the corner of Fourteenth and Beach Drive. I'll call in seven minutes."

	"Damn it!" Fitch screamed. He shouted for Jose and they rushed to his car. The phone was ringing as they got there.

	"Hey, Fitch. Juror number seven, Herrera, is really annoying Nick. I think we'll lose him today."

	"Don't do it, Marlee! He's on our side."

	"Oh, Fitch, they'll all be on our side when it's over. Anyway, be in court at nine to see what happens."

	Fitch controlled himself, and walked calmly to the car. Whatever she wanted. It didn't matter.

	***

	Judge Harkin lived in Gulfport, fifteen minutes from the courthouse. As he was getting ready to leave for the courthouse, the phone rang.

	"Judge, I'm sorry to bother you at home," said a nervous voice. "It's Nicholas Easter."

	"What's the matter?" The Judge wondered how Nicholas had obtained his phone number, but said nothing.

	"It's about Herrera," Nicholas said. "I think maybe he's reading things that aren't on the approved list. This morning, when I went into the dining room, he was there alone and he tried to hide a copy of Mogul from me. Isn't that some kind of business magazine?"

	"Yes it is," replied Harkin. If Easter was telling the truth, and why should he doubt him, then Herrera would be sent home immediately. The reading of any unauthorized material meant dismissal. "Do you think he's discussed it with anyone else?"

	"I doubt it. Like I said, he was trying to hide it from me. But I'll listen carefully."

	"You do that. I'll ask Colonel Herrera to come in and see me this morning. We'll probably search his room."

	"Please don't tell him I reported him. I feel really bad about doing it."

	"It's OK. The trial's almost over, Nicholas. I'm asking the lawyers to be as quick as they possibly can."

	On his way to the court, Harkin called the Sheriff and asked him to go to the Siesta Motel and wait. He then called Lou Dell, who told him that Mogul wasn't sold at the motel. He wondered how a sequestered juror could have got a copy of it.

	When Harkin arrived in court he told Rohr and Cable what he'd learned, without telling them who'd told him. Both lawyers were unhappy. Cable was annoyed because everyone thought that Herrera would vote with the defense. Rohr was cross because they were going to lose a juror, and there was a danger the trial might have to be repeated.

	Herrera was called to the Judge's chambers, where he was told he had to answer some questions. He felt like a criminal.

	"Have you been reading any materials not specifically authorized by me, in particular a business weekly magazine called Mogul?" asked the Judge.

	"Not since I've been sequestered," Herrera replied.

	"Will you agree to a search of your room?"

	The Colonel went red. "What are you talking about?" he demanded.

	"I have reason to believe that you have been reading unauthorized materials at the motel. I think a search of your room would settle the matter," replied the Judge.

	Herrera knew there was nothing in his room. "Then search it," he said, between his teeth.

	In the motel, the Sheriff and two deputies found the newspapers and magazines under Herrera's bed. They took them to the Judge's chambers. The Judge showed them to Herrera. "These items were found under the bed in Room 50, just minutes ago."

	Herrera was speechless. "They're not mine," he said angrily. "Somebody must have put them there."

	"The fact is that these were found in your room. I have no choice. You are dismissed from jury service."

	There were many questions Herrera wanted to ask, but he suddenly realized he'd be on the golf course by lunchtime. "Whatever you say, Judge."

	***

	The jurors took their seats a few minutes after ten. In the courtroom, the jury watched silently as Judge Harkin showed them a copy of Mogul. He asked if anyone had read it, or heard what was in it. No one.

	"Juror number seven, Frank Herrera, has been dismissed and replaced by the extra juror, Mr. Henry Vu."

	Fitch's newspaper dropped several inches, as he stared at the new juror. He was scared because Herrera had gone, and thrilled because his girl Marlee had done exactly what she'd promised. Fitch looked at Easter, who stared back.

	Cable's first witness on Thursday was Dr. Denise McQuade. The defense wanted to answer Leon Robilio's claims that kids were targeted by the cigarette industry. Dr. McQuade was beautiful and clever. She'd written four books and many articles. She quickly made her point. Advertising is everywhere. Children are familiar with commercials for all kinds of things that kids eat and drink, like hamburgers and soft drinks. No one accuses those companies of dishonestly targeting the young.

	Dr. McQuade's testimony made perfect sense to the jury.

	***

	Rohr spent his lunch hour with Cleve, discussing what they should do about Derrick. "This is what we'll do," said Rohr. "We'll give him fifteen thousand dollars now, and the other ten after the verdict. We'll promise him twenty-five thousand for the other votes. We'll also record the interview. If we get our verdict, we won't pay, and if he causes problems, we'll threaten to call in the FBI."

	"I like it," Cleve said.

	"Get the cash. You must see him this afternoon."

	Cleve met him in a cheap bar. But Derrick had other plans. He wanted Angel's twenty-five thousand dollars in cash, now, and he also wanted an advance payment for each of the other jurors. Eighty thousand dollars in cash, now.

	"You're crazy," Cleve said.

	"And you're a crook," replied Derrick.

	"There's no way we can pay eighty thousand cash."

	"Fine, I'll go to the tobacco company."

	"You do that," said Cleve.

	On Thursday morning, the search for Claire had a small success. They got information about another friend of Claire's. Her name was Beverly Monk and she lived in Greenwich Village in New York. Swanson flew to New York and phoned her, pretending to be Nicholas. He'd practiced imitating Nicholas's voice many times.

	"It's Jeff Kerr."

	"Oh yes." Maybe she remembered him, maybe she didn't.

	"I'm in the city and I wondered if you'd heard from Claire recently. I'm looking for her."

	"I haven't talked to Claire in four years. Look, I'm real busy now."

	"Sure." Swanson called Fitch. They decided to offer Beverly Monk cash.

	***

	Fitch knew Marlee would ring on Friday morning.

	"Hi, Fitch. Lonnie Shaver's bothering Nicholas."

	"Oh! Damn! No! You can't do that! You've got to stop this, Marlee." Fitch was aware of how desperate he sounded. "Don't do it, please. Let's talk about this."

	"We'll meet in an hour. Fulton Street, number 120."

	Fitch walked to Fulton Street. He went alone.

	"Are we ready to talk money?" he asked, with a nasty grin.

	"Yes. You send me ten million dollars before the verdict."

	"You must be joking."

	She never stopped looking at him. "Ten million, Fitch, and there's no discussion. How much is in The Fund?"

	"The what?" he said. No one knew about The Fund!

	"Don't play games, Fitch. I want ten million dollars sent to a bank in Singapore before the jury withdraws to discuss their verdict. Otherwise, the deal's off."

	"What happens if the deals off?"

	"One of two things. Either Nicholas will split the jury, or he'll persuade it to vote nine votes to three for the plaintiff." The game was over. She was in control. "So we have a deal?"

	"Yes," said Fitch. They shook hands.

	***

	Swanson approached Beverly Monk in a corner coffee shop. "Excuse me, are you Beverly Monk?"

	She looked up, surprised, and said, "Yes, who are you?"

	"A friend of Claire Clement's."

	"What do you want?" She was nervous, but the shop was crowded. "You called me yesterday, didn't you?"

	"Yes, I did. I lied. I said I was Jeff Kerr. I'm not. I'm Jack Swanson. I work for some lawyers in Washington."

	"Is Claire in trouble?"

	"No." Swanson gave a quick explanation of Claire's summons to jury service for a huge trial in the future. "We'll pay for information," he said.

	"How much?"

	"A thousand dollars, cash, to tell me everything you know about Claire Clement." Swanson took out an envelope and placed it on the table. Beverly stared at it, then grabbed it and put it in her purse.

	"There's not much to tell," she said. " I worked with her for six months. Then I left town. I called her once or twice, then we lost contact."

	"Where did she go to college?"

	"Somewhere in the Midwest. Claire was a very secretive person. She didn't talk about her past. I didn't ask."

	Swanson thanked her. As he was leaving, she offered to make a few phone calls. She obviously wanted more money. Swanson said fine, and gave her his business card.

	Hoppy sat in the back of a long, black Chrysler car with Mr. Cristano. Nitchnian and Napier were in the front. Hoppy had met with Nitchnian and Napier the day before, and admitted that Millie hadn't reacted too well to the document.

	"When do you see her again?" Cristano asked.

	"Tonight, 1 think."

	"The time has come, Hoppy, for you to tell her the truth."

	Hoppy's eyes watered as he stared out the window. He cursed himself for his stupidity. If he had a gun, he could almost shoot Todd Ringwald and Jimmy Hull Moke. He could definitely shoot himself.

	"I guess so," he whispered.

	"You'll have to tell her that if she doesn't support the defense's case, you will go to prison for five years."

	Hoppy started crying. In the front, Nitchman grinned.



	Chapter twelve

	Hoppy Dupree's Confession

	Fitch met with Marlee an hour after the previous meeting ended. "How much does Rohr know?" he asked.

	"He knows nothing. We never met. I made you think I'd met him, but it never happened."

	"Promise me you won't get rid of Lonnie Shaver," Fitch said. "Tell me why. If we're working for the same verdict, then we have to be honest."

	"All I can say is that Lonnie has been bought and paid for. How many votes does Nicholas have now?"

	"He'll have nine votes before the jury withdraws, maybe more. He just needs a bit of help with a few, like Rikki Coleman, for instance."

	"We might have some information about her."

	"You keep playing games, so will I. What about Millie Dupree?" Nicholas had noticed Hoppy's sudden interest in the trial, and he and Marlee had their suspicions that Fitch was trying to use Hoppy to persuade Millie.

	Fitch decided to be cautious. "Nothing on Millie," he said. They discussed the other jurors briefly. Marlee asked for another twenty-five thousand dollars to bribe Jerry Fernandez and another juror, then gave new instructions for the transfer of the ten million dollars. The meeting was over.

	Later on Friday, Fitch instructed each of the Big Four CEOs to send two million dollars each to The Fund immediately. There was no time for explanations. He then transferred ten million dollars from The Fund's bank account to a new account which he opened in the Netherlands Antilles. By Friday evening, it was all done. At first, Fitch was relieved, but he knew his work wasn't finished. He didn't know the real Marlee, and why she was doing this. Fitch didn't like the unknown. He soon became angry and worried again.

	***

	At eight on Friday evening, Derrick went to Durwood Cable's office. He was nervous and when he asked for a Mr. Gable by mistake, he was told that no one of that name worked there.

	***

	In court, Judge Harkin was worried about the jury. It was five on Friday. They were bored and tired. The lawyers were worried too; the jurors weren't reacting to testimony as they should be. They were staring blankly into space or trying to stay awake.

	Nicholas wanted the jurors to be tired. They'd listen to him more willingly. He persuaded all the jurors to sign a letter to Judge Harkin asking for the trial to continue on Saturday. Judge Harkin agreed. "The trial should be over Monday afternoon," he said. "We'll have closing arguments on Monday morning, and you'll receive the case before noon. That's the best I can do."

	There were smiles from the jury. With the end in sight, they could manage one more weekend together. There would be personal visits tonight, tomorrow night, and Sunday.

	***

	Hoppy arrived in Millie's room late. He sat on her bed and put his face in his hands.

	"What's the matter, Hoppy?" she asked, frightened. He finally told her. Mr. Todd Ringwald, Stillwater Bay, Jimmy Hull Moke, Napier, Nitchman, and the tape. How could he have been so stupid! Millie began crying. But there was more. When he got to the part where he did a deal with Mr. Cristano, Millie stopped crying.

	"But I'm not sure I want to vote for the tobacco company," she said.

	"Wake up, Millie. If you don't, I go to prison for five years."

	"That's not fair." Millie was shocked.

	"What about the kids?" Hoppy asked. He'd planned his arguments in advance. Millie felt she'd been hit by a bus.

	"It's not fair to the people in the trial," she said.

	"I know, honey," he replied. "I know. I'm a total failure. Believe me, I've even thought about shooting myself."

	"Don't be silly," she said, and started to cry again.

	After Hoppy had left, Millie couldn't sleep. At midnight, she went down to the Party Room for a snack. She found Nicholas alone.

	"Why are you up so late?" he asked. "You look troubled."

	"I am. Can you help me, Nicholas?"

	"I'll try."

	She told him everything. Nicholas suspected a scam but didn't tell Millie that. She promised to do nothing until they spoke again. He went to his room and rang Marlee.

	***

	In court on Saturday, Cable decided to start with a bit of action. His witness was a Dr. Olney, who'd done research on laboratory mice. He had a video of the mice. Over some years the mice had been given huge doses of cigarette smoke. Not one had developed lung cancer.

	Hoppy was in court, listening. He'd promised Millie that he'd come to show his support. Derrick sat at the back and continued to plot. Rikki Coleman's husband was also in court; so were the families of some of the other jurors.

	***

	Marlee had been working since six on Saturday morning. She called newspaper reporters, the police, FBI information lines, and government information services. She soon decided that the whole Hoppy affair was a scam arranged by Fitch.

	Fitch arrived for a meeting with Marlee at ten. Earlier that morning, he'd received a report on the investigations into Claire Clement. Before she arrived in Lawrence in the summer of 1988, she hadn't existed. While in Lawrence, she made no long distance phone calls. After she left Lawrence, the trail led nowhere. She'd probably changed her identity. Whoever she was, she was smart.

	"We've got problems with Rikki Coleman," said Marlee. "Nicholas thinks she wants a big verdict."

	Without comment, Fitch handed Marlee a piece of paper.

	"So she was pregnant? You're sure this is her?"

	"Positive."

	"You have nothing on Herman Grimes?"

	"Nothing," replied Fitch. "Nicholas will have to deal with him. He's getting paid for it. If there's a problem, can't you get him removed?"

	"We're thinking about it."

	Fitch shook his head in amazement. "Do you realize what you're doing?"

	"I think so. That's all for now, Fitch. I have work to do."

	Later that day, Marlee received a call from an FBI Agent in Biloxi called Madden. He confirmed that Nitchman, Napier, and Cristano weren't FBI agents and he'd love to talk to them. Marlee said she'd try to arrange a meeting.

	***

	At three on Saturday afternoon, the defense finished. The jurors were free to go. There would be trips to a football match or movie theater arranged for Saturday night, followed by personal visits. On Sunday the jurors could go to church, and in the evening there would be more personal visits.

	Millie had no interest in movies, and certainly none in football. Hoppy arrived with some food, which they ate slowly. After dinner, they talked about their problems again. There were more tears and more apologies. Finally, Millie confessed that she'd told Nicholas everything. He could be trusted, she said.

	At ten-thirty, Nicholas, back from the football game, visited Millie's room. He explained to Hoppy and Millie that the whole thing was a scam. A close friend had made phone calls which confirmed that Napier, Nitchman, and Cristano weren't government agents and that KLX Property Group didn't exist. Hoppy had been tricked. At first Hoppy felt even more stupid, then he had questions. What did it mean? Was it good news or bad? "What about the tape," he asked, "of me and Jimmy Hull Moke?"

	"I'm not worried about it," Nicholas said confidently. "The tape was obtained illegally. Forget it."

	What sweet words. "You're serious?"

	"Yes, Hoppy. The tape will never be played again."

	Millie leaned over and kissed Hoppy. This time her tears were of joy.

	***

	On Sunday morning, some of the jurors went to church. Hoppy went to his office at ten. He'd called Napier at eight on Sunday morning with the news that he had important developments to discuss; he said he'd managed to persuade his wife, and she was influencing other jurors. Napier called Cristano, who called Fitch. Fitch was delighted and authorized the meeting.

	Napier and Nitchman arrived in Hoppy's office at eleven. Hoppy was making coffee. He started talking to his visitors. Another guest quietly entered the building through the front door, which Hoppy had left unlocked. He knocked on Hoppy's door and opened it.

	"Agent Alan Madden, FBI," he said, showing his badge. Napier and Nitchman went pale as their hearts stopped.

	"The FBI is already here," said Hoppy, acting perfectly, looking at Madden, then the other two, then Madden. "You guys don't know each other?"

	"FBI?" Madden said. "Show me your identification."

	"I can explain," Nitchman said, his voice higher than normal. "You see we're not really FBI agents - we're private investigators and, well - "

	"What!" screamed Hoppy. "You've been telling me for ten days that you're FBI agents. What's going on here?"

	"Who are you?" Madden asked the two men. There was no response. He took out a gun and searched them. Then he led them from the building, where another FBI agent was waiting. They got into a car and drove away.

	In the car, Napier and Nitchman invented a story. They'd been hired to investigate some real estate. One thing led to another, and their boss had made them pretend to be FBI agents. No harm done, really. Madden was a young agent and thought it was a minor crime. He gave them a lecture about pretending to be FBI officers, and told them to stay out of Mississippi.

	When Fitch heard the story, he was so angry that he broke a lamp. He sent Pang to fetch the two men. Three hours later Napier and Nitchman were sitting in a room next to Fitch's office, with Cristano.

	"Start at the beginning," he said. "I want to hear every word." They remembered nearly everything.

	After they'd left, Fitch sat and thought. Hoppy would tell Millie tonight. Millie would be lost as a defense juror. In fact, she would probably go right over to the other side and want billions of dollars for the poor widow Wood.

	Marlee could rescue the situation, only Marlee.



	Chapter thirteen

	Closing Speeches

	Beverly Monk had some information. She'd managed to trace a friend of Claire's, Phoebe. When she called Phoebe, she found out that Phoebe had also received a call from someone pretending to be Jeff Kerr. She knew it wasn't, but had spoken to him anyway. She hadn't seen Claire Clement in four years. Beverly told Phoebe that she wanted to contact Claire again. Phoebe told her Claire's real name.

	"It was Brant. Gabrielle Brant. She was from Columbia, Missouri. She had a boyfriend who was crazy and so she changed her name and left town. I think her father's dead. Her mother was a professor at the local university."

	"Is she still there?"

	"I have no idea."

	"I'll try to find her through her mom. Thanks, Phoebe."

	Beverly took an hour trying to reach Swanson on the phone to sell him this information. After checking with Fitch, Swanson offered her two and half thousand dollars. They bargained for ten minutes, and finally settled on four thousand, in cash. Swanson immediately flew to New York, arrived at dusk, and called Beverly's roommate, who told him that she might be at a party. He called the pizzeria where she worked, and was told she'd been dismissed. He drank coffee, made phone calls, and waited.

	***

	Marlee wanted one more meeting with Fitch. Fitch could have kissed her feet when he saw her.

	He decided to tell her everything about Hoppy and Millie and the scam which had gone wrong. Nicholas must talk to Millie immediately, before she spoke to the other jurors. What would she do when she learned the truth? It would be a disaster, no question about it.

	Marlee listened without reacting as Fitch told the story. It amused her to see Fitch sweat.

	"I think we should get her off the jury," Fitch declared, when he was finished.

	"Relax, Fitch. Nicholas and Millie are quite close. Millie will vote the way he wants."

	Fitch tried to smile. "Just out of curiosity, how many votes do we have right now?"

	"Nine. Look, Fitch, you're worrying too much. You've paid your money, you've got the best, now relax and wait for your verdict. It's in very good hands."

	"Will we get all twelve?"

	"Nicholas is determined to get them all."

	Out of the building, Fitch was almost dancing. Jose had never seen his boss so happy.

	***

	Wendall Rohr and Durwood Cable were each practicing their closing speeches. In a conference room, in front of seven lawyers, Wendall Rohr walked forward and back, speaking softly, with carefully chosen words, to his jury. His voice was warm and rich, filled with sympathy one minute and hard words for the tobacco companies the next. He lectured and persuaded. He was funny, and he was angry. He finished in fifty-one minutes. The closing speech had to be an hour or less - Judge Harkins orders. The comments from his audience were tough. Rohr agreed to perform again. It had to be perfect. Victory was so close.

	Cable had a larger audience. He was videotaped, so he could watch himself. He was determined to do it in half an hour. The jury would like that. Rohr would no doubt go on for longer. Cable delivered his closing speech, then watched the video. Again and again, throughout Sunday afternoon, and into the night.

	***

	By the time Fitch arrived at the beach house, he was his normal pessimistic self again. The four CEOs were waiting, having just finished a fine meal. Jankle was drunk. Fitch was questioned about the two million dollars he'd required from each of them. He explained that the defense had a very large, unplanned expense.

	"Do you have the votes, Fitch?" asked one of the CEOs.

	"I believe I do. The verdict has been purchased." His voice held a touch of pride.

	"How?"

	"I'll never tell," Fitch said coolly. "The details are not important."

	They stared at him. Eight times they'd been to the edge of disaster, and each time Rankin Fitch had saved them. Now he'd done it again. "How much?" Jankle demanded.

	"Ten million. I've purchased the verdict for ten million dollars. That's all I'll say. Of course, nothing is guaranteed. You never know until the jury comes back."

	Well, it ought to be guaranteed, at a price of ten million dollars. But the CEOs said nothing.

	***

	There was a general feeling among the jurors that Sunday night would be their last in sequestration. The mood was more relaxed, and many of the jurors packed up their things. It was the third night of personal visits. Marlee and Nicholas ate pizza in his room and discussed their plans.

	Marlee left at nine. Nicholas went to see Hoppy and Millie. They were full of thanks. Millie was worried about staying on the jury. She'd discussed it with Hoppy and didn't feel she could be fair after what had happened. Nicholas had anticipated this and wanted Millie to stay on the jury. If she told Judge Harkin what had happened, then the Judge would probably order the trial to be held again.

	"It's our job, Millie," Nicholas said. "We've been chosen to decide this case. It's our responsibility to reach a verdict."

	Millie agreed. Her new friend Nicholas made everything easier.

	***

	After failing to meet with Cable, Derrick had to deal with Cleve. They met in the Nugget Casino on Sunday night, and drank a beer. Cleve gave Derrick a packet containing fifteen thousand dollars. The other ten thousand would be paid after the verdict, as long as Angel voted for the plaintiff.

	After Cleve had left, Derrick stayed behind to gamble. He bet heavily. The beers kept coming. Down to seven thousand dollars. He wanted to cry. But his luck changed, and he left the casino with nearly eleven thousand dollars.

	Although it was too late for personal visits, he got in his car and started to drive to the Siesta Motel. Soon he noticed blue lights behind him. He stopped the car.

	"Have you been drinking?" asked a policeman. Derrick was taken to jail. A five-hour stay was automatic for drunk drivers. He couldn't phone Angel from jail, but he had to reach her before she left for court.

	At five-thirty on Monday morning, Marvis arrived at the police station to collect Derrick. Derrick gave his brother two hundred dollars, and borrowed his car. He raced to the Siesta Motel and tried to wake Angel by throwing stones at her window,

	"Don't move!" said a voice behind him. Derrick turned to see Chuck, one of the deputies, with a gun. "Hands up."

	Derrick was taken to jail for the second time that night.

	Angel slept through it all.

	***

	On Monday morning, while Nicholas helped Mrs. Grimes prepare Hermans breakfast, he dropped four small tablets into Herman's coffee. They wouldn't kill him. Herman would be sick for four hours, then recover completely.

	Nicholas carried their breakfast back to the Grimes's room. Mrs. Grimes thanked him; such a nice young man.

	The drama started half an hour later. The door to the Grimes's room was open and Herman was bent double on the bathroom floor. Lou Dell ran to the phone and rang the emergency services. Nicholas said to Rikki that maybe it was a heart attack. Herman had had one six years ago.

	The ambulance arrived and Herman was taken away. In the confusion, Nicholas managed to knock over the coffee cup. Lou Dell called Judge Harkin.

	***

	Pynex shares opened high on Monday morning. There was good news coming out of Biloxi, though no one knew the source. All tobacco shares rose in early, heavy trading.

	Judge Harkin arrived in court at nine-thirty. He'd been arguing with Rohr and Cable. Cable wanted a new trial after the loss of another juror, but the Judge didn't agree.

	Fitch sat in amazement. How do you give someone a heart attack? Was Marlee capable of poisoning a blind man? Thank God she was on his side.

	Judge Harkin told the jurors that Herman wasn't in danger. Everyone was very relieved, and Shine Royce took Herman's place. The Judge asked Wendall Rohr to start his closing speech. It went well, lasting forty-eight minutes, and he ended it with some figures. You could value Jacob Wood's life at a million dollars. Add some other damages, and the total sum that the family were due was two million. But there was also the role of punitive damages. How do you punish a company that has $800 million in cash?

	He was careful not to suggest a figure.

	In response, Durwood Cable took slightly more than half an hour to dismiss the idea that you should give millions to the family of a man who'd smoked for thirty-five years. It was just a means of getting money. He appealed to the jury's sense of fairness, asking them to judge the case on facts not emotions. He had the jury's complete attention.

	The Judge told the jury that the case was now for them to decide. He asked them to select a new foreman, in place of Herman Grimes. As the jury left, Nicholas turned and looked at Fitch. Fitch nodded.

	Fitch left the court and went to his office. Marlee phoned.

	"Fitch, I have new transfer instructions for the money." She wanted it sent to a bank in Panama City. "You have twenty minutes, Fitch. The jury is eating lunch. If I don't have confirmation by twelve-thirty, then the deal's off and Nicholas will change direction."

	Within ten minutes the money was on its way. He received confirmation by fax. At 12:20, Marlee called her banker in Panama, who confirmed receipt of ten million dollars.

	Marlee was in a motel room ten kilometers away, with a fax machine. After five minutes, she instructed the same banker to transfer the money to a bank in the Cayman Islands. Nicholas called at twelve-thirty to learn that the money was safe. Marlee went straight to the airport, where a small plane was waiting.

	***

	Swanson had waited patiently for Beverly. She'd rung him at 3:30 A.M. Monday morning, obviously drunk, and arranged to meet him at 7 A.M. in the coffee shop. She was four hours late, and looked drugged, but Swanson could have kissed her.

	"Have you got the money?" There was no doubt what the money would be spent on.

	"Yes, but tell me about Claire."

	Beverly gave him the information she'd got from Phoebe. "Now give me the money" she said.

	Swanson handed her the envelope. "Thanks," he said, and disappeared.

	He finally reached Fitch on the phone just after one. By then, Swanson was on his way to Missouri.



	Chapter fourteen

	The Verdict

	In the jury room, they were ready to do what they'd been dreaming about all month. They took their places and stared at the empty seat at the end of the table, the one that Herman had occupied.

	"Guess we need a new foreman," said Jerry.

	"And I think it should be Nicholas," Millie added quickly. There wasn't any doubt about who the new foreman would be. No one else wanted the job, and Nicholas seemed to know as much about the trial as the lawyers.

	Nicholas started. "Judge Harkin wants us to consider all the evidence, including the reports, before we start voting," he said.

	"I'm ready to vote now," said Lonnie Shaver.

	"Not so fast," said Nicholas. "This is a very complicated case and it would be wrong to rush things."

	"We're not going to read all that stuff are we?" asked Sylvia.

	"I have an idea," said Nicholas. "We'll each take a report, read it fast, and then make a summary for everyone else."

	They started work.

	***

	Marlee's flight from Biloxi to George Town, Grand Cayman, took ninety minutes. She went through customs with a new passport which showed her to be Lane MacRoland, a Canadian. She took a taxi to the Royal Swiss Trust bank. The tropical air was warm, but Marlee hardly noticed.

	She was greeted by a receptionist and within minutes had met a young man named Marcus. They'd spoken many times on the phone. The money had arrived, he told her. In his office, a secretary bought coffee and Marlee ordered a sandwich.

	Pynex shares were still strong when Marlee made her first trade. She sold 50,000 shares in Pynex at seventy-nine dollars, using a system which was popular with experienced investors. If the price of shares was going to fall, trading rules allowed them to be sold first at the higher price, then purchased later at the lower one. With ten million dollars in cash, Marlee would be allowed to sell approximately twenty million dollars' worth of shares. Later, she'd buy them back, and if their price had fallen, she'd make a profit on the difference in price.

	Marcus confirmed the trade, and Marlee then sold shares in two other Big Four companies, and then more in Pynex. She paused and instructed Marcus to watch Pynex closely. She'd just sold 110,000 shares, and was worried about the effect on Wall Street.

	"I think it's safe now," said Marcus, who'd been watching the share price closely for two weeks.

	"Sell 50,000 more," she said, without hesitation. She was very calm.

	Marcus's heart missed a beat, then he completed the trade. "That's approximately twenty-two million dollars, Ms. MacRoland. I think we should stop. More sales will need approval from my superior. One question. When do you anticipate movement on these shares?"

	"Tomorrow, early. If you want your other clients to think you're really smart, then you should suggest that they follow my example."

	Marcus sent for a company car to take Marlee to her hotel.

	***

	Marlee's present seemed under control, but her past was being discovered. At the University of Missouri, records were found of a Dr. Evelyn Y. Brant. She'd died in 1987, age fifty-six, and left everything to her daughter, Gabrielle, age twenty-one. Gabrielle had received nearly $200,000. On the death certificate it stated that Dr. Brant had died of lung cancer.

	By the time Fitch was told this, they knew more. Dr. Brants husband, Dr. Peter Brant, had died in 1981 at the age of fifty-two, leaving everything to his dear wife Evelyn and his daughter, Gabrielle. He'd also died of lung cancer.

	Fitch took the telephone call from Swanson alone, with the door locked. At first, he was too shocked to react. Both of Marlee's parents had died of lung cancer! He wrote it down on a yellow pad as if he could analyze it, as if he could somehow make it fit in with her promise to deliver a verdict.

	He closed his eyes and rubbed his head. He must stay calm. There was nothing he could do to stop the jury's discussions. They were in there, with deputies by the door. Fitch made a list of possible things he could do, all of which would be dangerous, illegal, and would fail.

	He slowly rose to his feet, and took the glass lamp in both hands. Konrad and Pang were standing outside and heard a crash as the lamp hit the wall. Fitch shouted something about "the money," then the desk hit the wall.

	"Find the girl!" he screamed. "Find the girl!"

	***

	After the period of forced concentration, Nicholas decided that some debate was needed. He started by summarizing a report on the state of Jacob Wood's lungs. His audience was bored.

	"I have an idea," Rikki Coleman said. "Let's see if we can all agree that cigarettes cause lung cancer."

	"Fine with me," said Nicholas. "Raise your hands if you believe that cigarettes cause lung cancer." Twelve hands went up in the air.

	"Who thinks nicotine is addictive?" Another yes vote.

	"Let's keep united, folks," Nicholas said. "It's really important that we walk out of here voting the same way." Most of the jurors had heard him say this before. The legal reasons weren't clear, but they believed him anyway. They continued to work through the reports. They left the room to smoke and to stretch. Lou Dell and two deputies guarded the door.

	After another juror had summarized a report on the contents of cigarette smoke, Lonnie Shaver spoke.

	"I thought we'd decided that cigarette smoke was harmful." He looked at Nicholas. "I say we get on with the voting. I'll go first." He took a deep breath and everyone turned to watch him. "My position is easy. I believe cigarettes kill. That's why I leave them alone. Nobody can force you to smoke, but if you do, you'll suffer the consequences. Don't smoke for thirty years, and then expect me to make you rich... These crazy lawsuits need to be stopped."

	"Do you know when I started smoking?" said Angel Weese. "I remember the exact day. I was thirteen, and I saw this really good-looking guy, all smiles, perfect teeth, with a beautiful girl on his arm, and a cigarette in one hand. 'What great fun,' I thought. 'There's the good life.' So I went home, got my money, and bought a pack of cigarettes. Don't try and tell me anyone can give up. I'm addicted."

	Lonnie said nothing. The arguments continued, then the jury returned to their reading. At five o'clock, Judge Harkin called them back. "You've had the case for five hours. I'd like to know if you're making progress."

	Nicholas stood up. "I think so, Your Honor. We're determined to finish and have a verdict sometime tonight."

	"Wonderful. Thank you. Dinner is on the way. I'll be in my chambers if you need me."

	***

	Dinner was over at six-thirty, and the jury agreed to vote.

	"Are you willing to hold Pynex responsible for the death of Jacob Wood?" asked Nicholas. Four jurors voted yes, four no, the rest weren't sure.

	"I think it's time for you to say what you think," Lonnie said to Nicholas.

	"OK," he said. He'd practiced this speech, and spoke very persuasively. "I'm certain that cigarettes are dangerous - they kill 400,000 people a year and they are full of nicotine. I think cigarettes killed Jacob Wood and I am also certain that tobacco companies lie and cheat and do everything in their power to persuade kids to smoke. They are selfish and greedy and should be punished."

	Rikki Coleman and Millie Dupree felt like clapping.

	"You want punitive damages?" asked Jerry.

	"The verdict means nothing if it's not significant. It has to be huge."

	They went round the table again - seven for the plaintiff, three for the defense.

	"How much money do you have in mind for Celeste Wood?" asked Rikki.

	"A billion dollars." Mouths fell open.

	"That's ridiculous," said Lonnie. At that moment, most of the other jurors agreed. The discussions continued. Finally, they agreed ten votes to two that Celeste Wood should receive two million dollars in actual damages. After the mention of a billion dollars, two million seemed a very small amount. Again, they voted ten to two for punitive damages. "Any idea of how much?" asked Nicholas.

	"I have an idea," said Jerry "Get everyone to write down their amounts on a piece of paper, then add them up and divide by ten. That way we'll see what the average is."

	The jurors quickly wrote their numbers on pieces of paper. Nicholas slowly unfolded each piece of paper and called the numbers out to Millie, who wrote them down. One billion, one million, fifty million, ten million, one billion, one million, five million, five hundred million, one billion, and two million.

	Millie did the math. "The average is three hundred fifty-six million, nine hundred thousand."

	Lonnie jumped to his feet. "You're crazy," he said and left the room, banging the door behind him.

	Another juror looked shocked. "I can't do this. I'm retired, OK. I have enough money, but I can't understand these figures."

	"These numbers are real," Nicholas said, "and the company is very rich. It has eight hundred million in cash. We've got to think big, or they won't take any notice."

	"What will happen to the tobacco industry if we bring back a big verdict like this?" asked Angel.

	"There'll be a lot of action. The industry will have to examine their advertising plans again. They'll go to the government and demand special laws, but I suspect they'll get less and less help. The industry will never be the same," Nicholas answered. "We need to decide on an amount, folks, if we want to go home."

	"I have an idea," said Jerry. "Let's take it up to four hundred million, half their cash."

	"Count the votes," said Nicholas. Nine hands went up. He filled in the verdict form and made everyone sign it. Lonnie returned.

	"We've come to a verdict, Lonnie."

	"What a surprise. How much?"

	"Two million dollars, and four hundred million dollars. Care to join us?"

	"Hell, no," answered Lonnie.

	Nicholas walked to the door and asked Lou Dell to inform Judge Harkin that his jury was ready.

	While they waited, Lonnie whispered to Nicholas, "Is there any way I can say that I didn't agree?" He was more nervous than angry.

	"Sure, don't worry. The Judge will ask each one if this is our verdict. When he asks you, make sure everyone knows you don't agree with it."

	"Thanks."



	Chapter fifteen

	Fitch's Surprise

	Lou Dell delivered a note from Nicholas to the Judge. In it, Nicholas asked for a deputy to accompany him from the courthouse as soon as the trial was finished. He said he was scared.

	The Judge gave the necessary instructions, and then went into the courtroom. The atmosphere was full of anticipation. Lawyers were walking around, nervous and wild-eyed. It was almost eight o'clock.

	"I have been informed that the jury has reached a verdict," Harkin said loudly. "Please bring in the jury."

	They came in looking serious. Lou Dell took the verdict form from Nicholas and handed it to the Judge. His face showed no reaction to the extraordinary news he was holding. He was very shocked, but there was nothing he could do. It was technically correct. There would be action to reduce it later on, but he couldn't do anything now. He gave it back to Lou Dell, who asked Nicholas to read it.

	"We, the jury, find in favor of the plaintiff, Celeste Wood, and grant her damages of two million dollars."

	Wendall Rohr and his lawyers breathed a huge sigh of relief. They'd just made history.

	But the jury wasn't finished. "And we, the jury, find in favor of the plaintiff, Celeste Wood, and grant punitive damages of four hundred million dollars."

	Cable sank down into his chair as if he'd been shot. The other defense lawyers stared at the jury box, mouths open, eyes wide in total disbelief. "Oh my God!" one of them said.

	Rohr was all smiles as he put his arm around Celeste Wood, who'd started crying. The other lawyers with Rohr congratulated each other. Oh, the thrill of victory, the thought of sharing 40 percent of this verdict.

	"Now, ladies and gentlemen of the jury," Judge Harkin said. "I am going to ask each of you individually if you voted in favor of this verdict."

	"I did," answered Nicholas Easter and six others. When it came to Lonnie, he said loudly, "No, your Honor, I did not, I disagree with this verdict entirely." Two more jurors said they hadn't voted for the verdict, but the final two, Sylvia and Jerry, stated they'd supported it. The vote was nine to three.

	Nicholas was extremely worried that Fitch wasn't in court. How much did he now know? Nicholas wanted to get out of the courtroom and leave town. The Judge thanked the jury and told them that they couldn't tell anyone about the discussions they'd had. They were dismissed.

	Fitch was watching from the viewing room in his office. He was alone; all the jury consultants had been dismissed. He'd discussed what he could do with Swanson. They could kidnap Easter, but he wouldn't talk and they'd go to jail for it. They decided to follow him, hoping he'd lead them to Marlee. But what could they do if they found her? They couldn't report her to the police.

	Fitch was trapped whatever he did.

	Nicholas left court quickly without saying goodbye to anyone. At the back entrance, the Sheriff was waiting for him in his car. "Judge said you needed some help." Nicholas directed him to a large apartment building north of town and got out, thanking the Sheriff. He then got in a new rental car that Marlee had left there two days ago and drove to Hattiesburg, where a private plane was waiting. He arrived in George Town with new Canadian papers. Marlee met him at the airport. They kissed.

	"Have you heard?" he asked.

	"Sure, it's all over CNN," she said. "Was that the best you could do?" she asked with a laugh. They kissed again.

	They went to the beach and sat in the sand alone as the waves washed across their feet. What a moment it was. Their four-year operation was over. Their plans had finally worked, perfectly.

	***

	Marlee went alone to the Royal Swiss Trust bank the following day. Marcus greeted her in his office.

	"Your trade in Pynex shares seems to have been extremely successful. I've been on the phone to New York, and things are really confused. The verdict has surprised everyone. Except you, I guess." There were so many questions he wanted to ask, but he knew there would be no answers. "They might stop trading for a day or two." He looked at his computer, and spoke to someone in New York. "They're offering Pynex shares at fifty dollars." Two minutes passed. His eyes never left the computer screen. "They're at forty-five now. Yes or no?"

	"No. What about the others?" Marcus's fingers danced across the keyboard. "The entire tobacco industry is down."

	"Check Pynex again," Marlee said.

	"Still falling. Forty-two, with a few small buyers."

	"Buy 20,000 shares at forty-two."

	A few seconds passed before he said, "Confirmed." The Marlee - Nicholas team had just made seven hundred and forty thousand dollars, less the bank's fees. She went on buying slowly. The quick kill was happening. She'd planned this very carefully and she'd never have another opportunity.

	A few minutes before noon, with the market still very upset, she'd finished. Marcus wiped his forehead.

	"Not a bad morning, Ms. MacRoland. You've made over eight million dollars, less fees."

	"I want the money transferred to a bank in Zurich." She handed him written instructions. "Immediately, please."

	She packed quickly. Then Nicholas and Marlee flew first class to Miami, where they waited two hours and flew on to Amsterdam. They watched the news in the plane. Wall Street was going round in circles. Experts were speaking every where. Judge Harkin had no comment. Cable couldn't be found, but Rohr finally came out of his office and took the credit for the victory.

	From Amsterdam they flew to Geneva, where they rented a hotel apartment for a month.

	***

	Fitch left Biloxi three days after the verdict. His future as director of The Fund was in doubt, but his firm had plenty of other work. Not as well paid as The Fund, however.

	A week after the verdict, he met with Luther Vandemeer and D. Martin Jankle in New York, and confessed every detail of his deal with Marlee. It wasn't a pleasant meeting.

	He also discussed with other New York lawyers the best way of attacking the verdict. The fact that Easter had disappeared immediately was suspicious. Herman Grimes had agreed to release his medical records, which showed that he'd been fit and healthy until that morning. He remembered an odd taste to his coffee, then he was on the floor. Colonel Frank Herrera had already given a sworn statement which said that the magazines under his bed weren't his. The mystery surrounding the verdict increased.

	The New York lawyers didn't know about the Marlee deal. They never would.

	Cable was planning to ask permission to interview all the jurors, an idea that judge Harkin seemed to like. How else could they find out what had happened in there? Lonnie Shaver was particularly anxious to talk. He'd received his promotion and was ready to defend American business.

	The appeal would be long and difficult.

	Rohr's future was filled with opportunity. Extra staff were employed just to answer the phone calls from other lawyers and possible victims. Wall Street seemed more sympathetic to Rohr than to the tobacco industry. The share prices stayed low. Antismoking groups openly predicted the bankruptcy and eventual death of the tobacco industry.

	***

	Six weeks after he left Biloxi, Fitch was eating lunch alone in a tiny Indian restaurant near Dupont Circle in Washington. It was snowing outside.

	She appeared from nowhere. "Hi, Fitch," she said, and he dropped his spoon.

	"What are you doing here?" he said, without moving his lips. He remembered how pretty she was. Her hair seemed shorter.

	"Just came to say hello."

	"You've said it."

	"And the money is being returned to you, as we speak. I'm transferring it back to your account. All ten million dollars, Fitch."

	He could think of no quick response. He was looking at the lovely face of the only person who'd ever beaten him. "How kind of you," he said.

	"I started to give it away, you know, to some of the antismoking groups, but we decided against it."

	"How's Nicholas?"

	"He's fine."

	"Why are you returning it?"

	"It's not mine. I never planned to keep the money. I just wanted to borrow it. Tell me, Fitch, did you find Gabrielle?"

	"Yes, we did."

	"And her parents?"

	"We know where they are."

	"Does it make more sense now?"

	"It makes more sense, yes."

	"They were both wonderful people. They were intelligent and energetic and loved life. They both got addicted to cigarettes in college and I watched them fight their habit until they died. They died terrible deaths, Fitch. I was their only child. My mother died at home on the sofa because she couldn't walk to her bedroom." She paused, but her eyes were surprisingly clear. It must have been sad, but Fitch could feel no sympathy.

	"When did you start this operation?"

	"Graduate school. I studied finance, thought about law, and then I dated a lawyer and heard stories of tobacco litigation. The idea grew."

	"An amazing idea."

	"Thanks, Fitch. From you, that's a nice thing to hear."

	"Are you finished with us?"

	"No. We'll watch the appeal closely, and if your lawyers go too far attacking the verdict, then I've got copies of the bank transfers. Be careful, Fitch. We're proud of that verdict, and we're always watching. And remember, Fitch, next time you go to trial, we'll be there."





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





	Chapter one

	D'Artagnan Begins His Adventures

	 On the first Monday of April, 1625, the town of Meung was in a state of excitement. People rushed down the streets, waving their swords and shouting. This often happened in those days because there were lots of wars and battles. Once the excitement began, it grew automatically until it was out of control. All the people rushed to the Jolly Miller Inn.

	Here, they discovered that the cause of the disturbance was a young man who stood near the main gate. He was eighteen years old and was tall and handsome, and he knew it. His clothes were faded and worn out. He had a long face with a strong jaw, which was typical for people from the Gascon area of France. He looked at everyone in a challenging manner, as if to say 'I'm as good as you are, and if you don't believe it, I will fight you!' He looked a bit like a farmer's son, but if you looked carefully, you would notice the long sword that hung from his shoulder strap and dangled against his calves. He stood in front of the Jolly Miller Inn, one hand on his hip and the other holding his horse's bridle. His head was held high, his legs apart, and his back to the wall, against the world.

	His horse, unfortunately, looked ridiculous. In fact, it was the horse which had first attracted the attention of the crowd. It looked about twelve or fourteen years old and had a tail like a rat's tail, as well as sores on its feet. It was more yellow than brown. It walked along slowly with its head hung so low between its front knees that it almost dragged along the road. When it arrived in the town of Meung, people laughed, pointing at the ridiculous horse. Its owner and rider was D'Artagnan, the young man who now stood at the Jolly Miller Inn. He realized that he did not cut a fine figure on this horse and had groaned inwardly when his father had given it to him as a parting gift, although he knew that it was worth at least seven crowns and that the words of wisdom that came with it were beyond price.

	"My son," this old man had said in his Gascon accent, "this horse was born in your father's stables and has lived here all its life. It's a good horse, so don't ever think of selling it, but treat it with kindness and respect."

	He gave his son a lot more advice. He told him to live dangerously and fight whenever he could. Then he gave him fifteen crowns, which was all the money he had, and a bottle of special ointment that his mother had made and that would cure every disease or wound very efficiently. He gave him a letter for Monsieur de Treville, who had once been a neighbor but was now the head of the musketeers, the personal army of the King of France.

	"Have a long and happy life, son! Goodbye!"

	D'Artagnan had set out to find his fame and fortune, making first for the little town of Meung, where he now was. People along the road smiled when they saw him, and when he arrived at Meung, nobody offered to hold his horse or help him dismount. As he dismounted, he saw a tall distinguished-looking gentleman through the window. He was talking to some other people, who listened to him carefully and then burst into laughter. D'Artagnan assumed that the man was talking about him, and he was almost right because he was actually talking about his horse. D'Artagnan, naturally, was extremely angry when he heard this happening, but before challenging the man to a duel, he decided to have a good look at him. He was about forty-five years old, had dark hair and a well-trimmed black moustache. He also had a small scar on his cheek.

	The stranger made another clever observation about the ridiculous horse, which made his appreciative audience laugh louder than ever. D'Artagnan felt that he was insulted and shouted at the rude stranger.

	"Hey, you! What's the joke?!"

	The stranger came out of the inn and stood looking at the horse and, ignoring D'Artagnan, made another insulting remark about its yellow color. D'Artagnan drew his sword and threatened the stranger, who also drew his sword and prepared to defend himself. However, the innkeeper and some others attacked D'Artagnan with sticks. D'Artagnan dropped his sword, which one of the men broke with a heavy stick. Then he was hit on the head and fell to the ground. The innkeeper brought him to the kitchen, and the stranger also went back into the inn.

	"How is the young lunatic?" he asked the innkeeper.

	"I hope you are not hurt, Your Excellency," he replied.

	The innkeeper had found D'Artagnan's letter for Monsieur de Treville and mentioned it to the stranger, who was surprised and a little worried. He wondered whether Monsieur de Treville had sent the young lunatic to try and kill him. He was here on important business and was expecting a young lady called Milady to arrive at any moment. He did not want the young lunatic to see Milady. However, this is exactly what happened. Milady arrived and was speaking to the stranger when D'Artagnan came out and saw them. He also heard them.

	"The Cardinal wants you to return to England immediately, Milady, and tell us when the Duke leaves London. All your instructions are in this box," said the stranger. "I'm returning to Paris."

	D'Artagnan rushed out and wanted to fight, but Milady told the stranger that he must not delay, and he galloped away. D'Artagnan tried to follow but fainted on the road. Milady's carriage sped away in the opposite direction.

	It wasn't until the next day that D'Artagnan noticed that his letter to Monsieur de Treville was missing. He searched for it and finally realized that the stranger had stolen it.

	"I'll tell Monsieur de Treville," he thought, "and he will tell the King!"

	He rode to Paris as quickly as he could on his yellow horse. There he sold the horse for three crowns and found a cheap room. He slept very well that night.



	Chapter two

	Monsieur de Treville

	The next day, D'Artagnan rose late and went to Monsieur de Treville's house, intending to meet the Captain of the musketeers. Monsieur de Treville himself had come to Paris as a young man, much like D'Artagnan, and had worked hard and faithfully to achieve the rank of Captain of the Musketeers. D'Artagnan's father considered him to be the third most important man in France, after the King and the Cardinal. King Louis XIII was still a young man, and he and the older Cardinal Richelieu ruled France together, although each had their own army of musketeers. Although the King and the Cardinal played chess together most evenings, their bodyguards often fought each other. Sometimes the fights were brawls and sometimes they were duels, although these had been outlawed. Dueling, however, was still a popular way of solving differences, and D'Artagnan was eager to fight as many duels as he could, in accordance with his father's advice.

	When D'Artagnan arrived at Monsieur de Treville's house, the hall was crowded with musketeers and other people waiting for an audience with the Captain. D'Artagnan had never seen anything like this before and was very impressed. However, he was not afraid and moved into the middle of the crowd. There was a group of four musketeers sword-fighting on the stairs, and D'Artagnan gasped when he realized that they were using real swords and actually scratching each other with them. On the landing of the stairs, he heard some musketeers telling love stories that made him blush and others telling stories about the Cardinal's private life which made him afraid, since his father had taught him to respect the Cardinal. He did not dare to join in these conversations.

	He introduced himself to a servant and requested an audience with Monsieur de Treville. While he waited, he noticed one of the musketeers wearing a beautiful shoulder-belt. Only the front was visible, however, because he also wore a red cape. Everybody was admiring his shoulder-belt. He tried to ignore them, but they all laughed at him.

	"You got it from that woman I saw you with last night, Porthos," said one.

	"I bought it myself," replied Porthos. "I have to spend my money on something, after all. It cost twelve pistoles. Isn't that true, Aramis?"

	Aramis was much younger and smaller than Porthos and said very little. However, all he had to do was nod, and everybody believed him. Then Aramis told a story about the Cardinal's private spy, Rochefort, pretending to be a monk in Brussels. He went on to speak about the Queen, and Porthos thought he insulted her. The two men were about to fight, when the door suddenly opened and a servant called out, "Monsieur de Treville awaits Monsieur D'Artagnan!"

	D'Artagnan entered the room to find Monsieur de Treville looking very angry. He greeted D'Artagnan, pleased to be reminded of his own Gascon youth. However, it was clear that he was still thinking about whatever had made him angry. He suddenly went to the door and called out, "Athos! Porthos! Aramis!"

	D'Artagnan, of course, already knew two of these men, who now came quickly into the room. Monsieur de Treville was furious.

	"The King is angry because the Cardinal told him that some of his guards had to arrest some of you musketeers for disturbing the peace! Both of you were there and so was Athos. Where is Athos?"

	"Athos is ill," replied Porthos.

	"I don't believe that! He is probably wounded or even dead. Nobody tells me anything! You must stop this stupid behavior and be more like the Cardinal's guards. They would not allow themselves to be arrested! Six guards arrested six musketeers! How is that possible?"

	Porthos explained. "They caught us by surprise and killed two of us before we had time to draw our swords. Athos was badly wounded and could not fight, and we had to surrender. I'm sorry, Sir, but we can't win every battle!"

	"I stabbed a couple of them with their own swords after I broke mine," added Aramis.

	Monsieur de Treville seemed a little more pleased with this news. "The Cardinal must have been exaggerating," he said.

	There was a knock at the door, and Athos came in. He was very pale but pretended that he was not wounded. Monsieur de Treville complimented him on his courage, but then the wounded musketeer fainted. Monsieur de Treville called a doctor, who said the problem was merely loss of blood.

	Monsieur de Treville then turned his attention to D'Artagnan and inquired about his father and his village. He promised that he would help him become a musketeer but that he had to serve two years in another regiment first, unless he could prove himself in some other way. D'Artagnan told him about the letter of introduction that had been stolen from him in Meung. Monsieur de Treville became very interested in this story when D'Artagnan mentioned the name of Milady. He asked D'Artagnan for a detailed description of the stranger.

	"I thought he was still in Brussels," said Monsieur de Treville to himself. "If you ever see him again," he said to D'Artagnan, "keep out of his way. He is very dangerous."

	At that very moment, however, D'Artagnan looked out of the window and saw the man who had stolen his letter in Meung.

	"He won't escape me this time!" he shouted, as he rushed out of the room.



	Chapter three

	How to Make Friends with Musketeers

	As D'Artagnan hurried down the stairs, he accidentally bumped into Athos, who was just on his way home. He apologized and wanted to keep going, but Athos said he had poor manners. D'Artagnan felt insulted and wanted to fight. They agreed to fight a duel near the convent at twelve o'clock.

	D'Artagnan hurried out of the house, still looking for the man who had stolen his letter. In the doorway, he bumped into Porthos and before long had agreed to fight a duel with him at one o'clock.

	By now, the man he was looking for had disappeared. D'Artagnan rushed up and down the street looking for him, but he was nowhere to be found. Then he saw Aramis talking to some guards. Aramis had his foot on a handkerchief, so D'Artagnan, trying to be polite, pulled it out for him and gave it to him. It was a beautiful handkerchief, but Aramis was embarrassed when D'Artagnan gave it to him. The guards were all laughing at him because they recognized the initials and coat of arms of a beautiful and wealthy, married lady on the handkerchief. Aramis denied that it was his, and when the guards had gone, he took D'Artagnan to task and soon another duel was arranged, this time for two o'clock.

	By this time, it was almost twelve o'clock, and D'Artagnan hurried toward the convent, where the first of his three duels was to be fought. He had no friends in Paris, so he could not find seconds to assist him. He would have to trust the musketeers' friends to act as seconds for him. He was worried about dueling with Athos because Athos was already wounded. If he beat Athos, he would get no credit for fighting a wounded man. On the other hand, it would look very bad if he was beaten by a wounded man.

	He found Athos sitting alone and waiting for his seconds. They talked as they waited, and D'Artagnan offered Athos some of his mother's ointment for his wound, suggesting that they might put off their duel until Athos's wounds had healed. Athos was grateful for the offer but declined.

	"People will find out about it and stop the duel," he said, "but it is a gallant offer. If I do not kill you, I hope we shall be friends."

	Then Porthos and Aramis arrived, and each was surprised to find that their opponent was also dueling with their best friends. None of them wanted to confess the reasons for their duels to the others, and D'Artagnan was gallant enough not to reveal them. He apologized to them.

	"If Athos kills me, I will not be able to honor my agreement to fight Porthos or Aramis," he said. With that, he drew his sword and prepared to fight. Athos also drew his sword, but at that very moment, some of the Cardinal's guards saw them and tried to prevent the duel from going ahead.

	"You know that it is illegal," they said and tried to arrest them all. There were five guards, and D'Artagnan threw in his lot with the musketeers. The nine men fought. D'Artagnan was very excited and fought ferociously. He circled Jussac, the leader of the guards, at least ten times and changed his stance a hundred times. Jussac became impatient and began to make mistakes so that eventually, D'Artagnan drove his sword into his body, and he fell to the ground. He then helped Athos in his fight against Cahusac, one of the Cardinal's favorites, and soon disarmed him. Athos put his sword through Cahusac's throat. One of the other guards had also been killed. Only Porthos was still fighting. Jussac was recovering and called out to Porthos's opponent, Bicarat, that he should surrender. Bicarat agreed, and the fight was over. The musketeers won. One of the five guards was dead, one surrendered, and the other three were wounded.

	The musketeers and D'Artagnan walked arm in arm along the street to Monsieur de Treville's house to tell him what had happened.

	When Monsieur de Treville heard the story, he knew that he had to go to the King immediately. First, however, he privately congratulated his musketeers on their victory, though he complained about their behavior in public. However, when he arrived at the palace, he was too late. The Cardinal had already told the King his version of the event, and the King was annoyed with his Captain. Monsieur de Treville told the King his version of the story.

	"Athos, Porthos, and Aramis were taking their young friend for lunch," he said, "when your guards saw them near the convent. I don't know why the guards were there. They had probably gone there to fight a duel. When they saw my musketeers, they dropped their own plans and fought against my men instead. There were five against three, but the young man joined in, and eventually, my musketeers won the fight. The young man fought very well and wounded Jussac."

	The King was very impressed. "It was a great victory! I must meet this young man! Bring him here tomorrow, together with the others."

	Monsieur de Treville was very pleased because it was not easy to persuade the young King to act against the Cardinal. He returned to his house and told the four adventurers of their appointment with the King.

	D'Artagnan was very excited. Early next morning, he arrived at Athos's door. The appointment was not until twelve, and Athos had arranged to play tennis with Aramis and Porthos. He invited D'Artagnan to come to the game.

	D'Artagnan had never played tennis before, and he was soon afraid that the ball would hit him and bruise his face. He didn't want this to happen just before his audience with the King, so he stood aside and watched Aramis and Porthos play. One of the Cardinal's guards was also watching the game. He had heard the story of the fight near the convent and wanted to take revenge against the musketeers, so when he saw D'Artagnan watching instead of playing, he called him a coward. Of course, D'Artagnan challenged him to a duel, and they went outside to fight. The guard was Bernajoux, one of the fiercest fighters in the Cardinal's guards, and he thought it would be easy to defeat D'Artagnan. There was nobody in the street just then, so they began their duel immediately. D'Artagnan scored a lucky hit on Bernajoux's shoulder. Then Bernajoux stumbled and fell into D'Artagnan's sword, stabbing himself and almost falling to the ground. He retreated toward the house of the Duc de la Tremouille, where he had friends.

	Two of Bernajoux's companions came to help him. The musketeers heard the fight and came running out onto the street as well. Soon there was quite a brawl. Other musketeers and guards joined in. Bernajoux escaped into the house, and the musketeers considered burning it down. However, since it was now eleven o'clock, the musketeers had to prepare for their audience with the King, and they left the scene of the fight.

	They went to Monsieur de Treville's house, and he went with them to the palace.

	"Hurry!" he said. "We must tell him our version of this morning's events before the Cardinal does. We'll just tell him that it was a continuation of yesterday's fight."



	Chapter four

	The Landlord's Wife

	Monsieur de Treville and the four comrades hurried to the palace to see the King but were disappointed when they arrived. The King had decided to go hunting in the forest!

	Monsieur de Treville spent the afternoon visiting Duc de la Tremouille and ensuring that he had a good understanding of the cause of the brawl. In the evening, the King returned from his hunt, which had been unsuccessful, and Monsieur de Treville went to see him. He persuaded the King to see Duc de la Tremouille and hear his opinion about the brawl, which the King did the next morning. When Monsieur de Treville returned to the palace, he brought the three musketeers and D'Artagnan with him. The King asked D'Artagnan to tell his version of the story and was soon convinced that the musketeers were not at fault. He rewarded them with forty pistoles, which they shared among them. However, he did give them a warning about the number of guards they were putting out of action.

	"I think one or two occasionally is enough," he said, "but seven in two days is too many!"

	D'Artagnan's three new companions helped him decide how he should spend his money. First, they had a wonderful meal. Then, D'Artagnan hired a servant, whose name was Planchet. Each of the musketeers had a servant that reflected their own personality. Athos was a quiet man who rarely spoke. He never spoke at all to his servant, Grimaud, and did not allow Grimaud to speak to him. He communicated with signs and beat him if he misunderstood. On those occasions, he sometimes spoke a few words.

	Porthos, on the other hand, loved to talk and show off, and his servant, Mousqueton, did the same. Porthos lived in a large, very impressive building but never allowed anyone into his rooms and was never home when anybody came to visit him unexpectedly.

	The third musketeer, Aramis, was scholarly and wanted to be a priest one day, and his servant, Bazin, was always reading books. He was a very quiet and loyal servant.

	D'Artagnan discovered that Athos, Porthos, and Aramis were not the real names of his friends, but he could not find out what their real names were. He asked each of them questions about themselves and about each other, but they would tell him nothing.

	The three musketeers taught D'Artagnan how to live in the city, and the four of them became inseparable. D'Artagnan was not a musketeer, but he helped with guard duties and was soon well known by all the other musketeers. Meanwhile, Monsieur de Treville had not been idle. One day, the King ordered the Captain of the guards, Monsieur des Essarts, to accept D'Artagnan in his company. D'Artagnan would have preferred to be a musketeer immediately, but Monsieur de Treville said that he should serve two years in another company first.

	"Of course," he said, "this period might become shorter if you do something special to prove yourself to be worthy."

	After a while, the money that the King had given D'Artagnan was all spent. The musketeers took it in turns to provide some money and get invitations to dinner with their friends. When one was invited to dinner, the other three came along and so did their servants. They got a small advance on their wages from Monsieur de Treville, and this helped for a while, but they were soon poor again. D'Artagnan began to wonder why four such brave and clever young men, who could accomplish anything they agreed to do together, were poor.

	While he was thinking about this one day, he had a visit from his landlord. He did not recognize him because he had not paid any rent for three months. The landlord was a timid but wealthy draper called Bonacieux, and he wanted D'Artagnan to help him. He said that he would overlook the unpaid rent. In fact, he promised that he would never charge him rent again and that he would also give him fifty pistoles. Of course, D'Artagnan was very interested.

	"My wife is one of the Queen's maids," said Bonacieux. "Yesterday morning, she was kidnapped. Four days ago, she told me that the Queen was afraid because the Cardinal was persecuting her. You know about the Saraband incident, of course?"

	"Yes, of course," replied D'Artagnan. He knew that the King and Queen did not like each other and that the Cardinal did not like the Queen either, but he didn't know anything about the Saraband incident. However, he didn't want the landlord to know that he didn't know.

	"Since then," continued Bonacieux, "the Cardinal has been worse. Now, he wants revenge. The Queen thinks that they have written to the Duke of Buckingham in her name and tricked him into coming to Paris. You know that the Duke is a friend of the Queen. I am sure they will set some sort of trap for him. I think they will force my wife to act as a kind of spy for them."

	"Do you have any ideas about who kidnapped her?" asked D'Artagnan.

	"I think I know him. He is the Cardinal's private spy. I don't know his name, but I have seen him. He is about forty-five years old, has dark hair and a well-trimmed, black moustache. He also has a small scar on his cheek."

	"A scar on his cheek?! I know him! Do you know where he lives?"

	"No, I don't. I got this letter."

	He gave D'Artagnan a letter. D'Artagnan took it to the window to read it.

	"Do not try to find your wife. We will give her back to you when we are finished with her."

	The landlord came to the window too and suddenly cried out.

	"Look! There! That man in the doorway across the street!"

	D'Artagnan looked out of the window and saw what the landlord saw. It was him! The man from Meung! The letter stealer and wife kidnapper!

	D'Artagnan drew his sword and rushed out of the room. On the stairs, he met Porthos and Athos who were just coming to visit him.

	"It's the man from Meung!" he shouted. They let him go. They had heard the story and knew that D'Artagnan wanted to fight this man.

	"He'll be back soon," they told each other.

	They went upstairs to his room. It was empty because the landlord had decided that it was safer to leave.

	D'Artagnan rushed up and down the streets with his drawn sword but could not find the man from Meung. He returned to the house across the street and knocked on the door until the neighbors put their heads out of their windows and told him that the house had been empty for six months. He returned to his own room, where Aramis had meanwhile turned up as well. He told the musketeers the landlord's story. Then Aramis told them his story.

	"Last night, I was visiting a friend who has a niece. I was escorting the niece to her carriage, when a man, who could well be your man from Meung, approached us and told us to get into his carriage. He had about five or six men to help him."

	"He mistook you for the Duke of Buckingham! And your friend's niece for the Queen!" said D'Artagnan.

	"I think that might be true. He addressed me as 'Duke' and my friend's niece as 'Madame,' and it was very dark."

	As the four friends were considering this, they heard hurried footsteps outside the door, and in the next moment, Bonacieux burst into the room.

	"Help!" he shouted. "Four policemen are trying to arrest me!"

	The musketeers drew their swords, ready to fight the policemen, but D'Artagnan told them to put them away. The policemen entered the room and, much to the amazement of the landlord and the musketeers, D'Artagnan helped them to arrest the landlord. He even offered the policemen some of the wine he had obtained from the landlord.

	When they had gone, Porthos and Aramis turned on D'Artagnan and complained about what he had done.

	"You let the police arrest your friend!"

	Athos disagreed with them. "D'Artagnan, you're a genius!"

	The others were astonished but agreed to stick with their motto: One for all and all for one.

	D'Artagnan was taking the lead and told them they should all go to their own homes. "We have declared war on the Cardinal himself!" he said.



	 Chapter five

	The Duke of Buckingham

	Why did Athos think that D'Artagnan was a genius when he allowed the policemen to arrest Bonacieux and take him away? It was simply because he and D'Artagnan guessed that the police would use Bonacieux as bait for a trap, as they often did in those days. They would take the victim away in secret, and then arrest everyone who came to the house. That is exactly what happened on this occasion.

	The three musketeers went out to search for Madame Bonacieux. Athos questioned Monsieur de Treville, who could tell him only that he had seen the King, the Queen, and the Cardinal the previous evening. The King was not comfortable, the Cardinal looked worried, and the Queen had red eyes from either crying or not sleeping. Monsieur de Treville urged Athos to be loyal to the King and Queen.

	While the musketeers were out searching, D'Artagnan was busy in his room, which was directly above Bonacieux's room. Through his window, he could see everybody who came to the house, and by putting his ear on the floor, he could hear most of what the police and Bonacieux's visitors were saying in the room below. Each visitor was asked whether Monsieur Bonacieux had ever given them anything to pass on to Madame Bonacieux, or whether Madame Bonacieux had ever given them anything to pass on to Monsieur Bonacieux. Then they were asked whether either Monsieur or Madame Bonacieux had ever told them a secret.

	D'Artagnan thought about these questions and decided that the police were trying to find out whether the Duke of Buckingham was in Paris and about to meet with the Queen. On the evening of the second day, another visitor arrived at the house, and D'Artagnan soon heard screams and moans coming from the room below.

	"I am Madame Bonacieux," he heard, "and I work for the Queen!" Then he heard a struggle, and there was a loud crash as something fell to the floor. D'Artagnan was worried that they would take her away, so he told Planchet to run and get the musketeers. D'Artagnan himself rushed downstairs with sword drawn and confronted the unarmed policemen. They soon ran from the house, leaving D'Artagnan alone with Madame Bonacieux. He looked at her and immediately fell in love with her. She was about twenty-five years old and had dark hair, blue eyes, and beautiful, white teeth. She saw D'Artagnan and fainted. On the floor by her feet lay a beautiful white handkerchief. D'Artagnan picked it up and saw the same initials and coat of arms as he had seen on the handkerchief that caused him so much trouble with Aramis. He put it into Madame Bonacieux's dress pocket.

	When Madame Bonacieux recovered, she smiled at D'Artagnan and thanked him for rescuing her. D'Artagnan fell in love again.

	"Who were those men?" she asked. "What did they want? Where is my husband?"

	D'Artagnan explained that the men were policemen working for the Cardinal and that her husband had been arrested.

	"My husband, arrested? But he is as innocent as the day!" she said. D'Artagnan noticed a smile flicker across her face. He told her what had happened.

	"Yes," she agreed, "I was kidnapped, but I don't know who did it or why. Do you know?"

	D'Artagnan told her about the man from Meung.

	"That's him!" she said. "But who is he?"

	D'Artagnan could not answer this question, although he wished with all his heart that he could.

	"How did you escape?" he asked.

	"They were careless. They left me alone, and I climbed out of a window. I came straight here to find my husband."

	"Will he protect you?"

	"No, he is a nice man, but he is not capable of fighting. I wanted to give him a message. It is a secret."

	Suddenly, D'Artagnan realized that the policemen could return and bring more police with them. He and Madame Bonacieux rushed out of the house and down the street.

	"I need to find out if it is safe for me to return to the palace," said Madame Bonacieux. "My husband could find out, but now he is not here."

	D'Artagnan volunteered to help, so she told him where to go. She told him a password and said he should ask for Monsieur de Laporte and tell him to come to her. In the meantime, D'Artagnan took her to Athos's room, and she promised to wait there while he was at the palace.

	Monsieur de Laporte warned him that he might need an alibi for the evening, so D'Artagnan went to visit Monsieur de Treville. While he waited for the Captain to arrive, he turned back the clock. When the Captain arrived, he made sure that he noticed the time, and then spoke with him about some unimportant matters for a while. When the Captain left, D'Artagnan put the clock back to the correct time. Now he had an alibi.

	He went back onto the street and began to wander about aimlessly, thinking of the beautiful Madame Bonacieux. He was in love. It grew dark, and D'Artagnan realized that he was close to Aramis's house, so he decided to visit him and explain what had happened. As he approached the house, however, he noticed a young woman ahead of him. He watched as she went to Aramis's house and knocked on the window. It opened, and the young woman spoke to a woman inside, and the two women exchanged handkerchiefs. Until now, D'Artagnan had not seen the faces of either of the women, but as the young woman walked away from the house, he saw that it was Madame Bonacieux. He began to follow her, but she noticed him and began to run. When he caught her, she was afraid, but when she realized that it was D'Artagnan, she was calm again. She claimed that she did not know anybody called Aramis, although she had knocked on his window, and she would not tell D'Artagnan the name of the woman he had seen through the window. She was very alarmed when D'Artagnan mentioned the handkerchief and made him promise never to mention it again.

	D'Artagnan told Madame Bonacieux that he loved her, and she allowed him to escort her to her destination on condition that he did not stay there and wait for her to come out. D'Artagnan was reluctant to promise this, but at last, he agreed.

	When he returned home, Planchet told him that Athos had been arrested. The police had found him in D'Artagnan's room and mistaken him for D'Artagnan. Athos did not point out their mistake.

	"If the police think they have captured D'Artagnan," he told Planchet, "they will stop looking for him, and he can operate more freely."

	Planchet had not been able to find Porthos or Aramis, so D'Artagnan decided he should go to Monsieur de Treville's house and report what had happened. On the way, he was walking behind another young woman, who was with a man in musketeer uniform. D'Artagnan thought it was Aramis. He got in front of them and barred their way. Then he realized that it was not Aramis and that the young lady was Madame Bonacieux again! He had to explain that he was not breaking his promise to Madame Bonacieux but had come across them merely by accident. The man grew impatient and tried to push D'Artagnan out of the way. D'Artagnan immediately drew his sword and was ready to fight.

	"Don't fight, Your Grace!" cried Madame Bonacieux.

	That's how D'Artagnan met the Duke of Buckingham. He apologized to him, and the Duke allowed him to follow him and Madame Bonacieux to the palace as a kind of guard.



	Chapter six

	The Queen and the Cardinal

	When they arrived at the palace, Madame Bonacieux led the Duke of Buckingham through some narrow passages, up and down some stairs, into a small room where she asked him to wait. The Duke knew that he was walking into a trap set by the Cardinal, but he did not care. He loved adventure and danger. He was thirty-five years old and was considered to be the handsomest man in England. He was also very powerful, being King Charles's Prime Minister. However, he did not want the Cardinal to know that he was meeting with the Queen. The Cardinal disliked the Queen. She was known as Anne of Austria, although she was born in Spain. King Louis XIII had married her to make his alliance with Spain strong. The Cardinal, however,wanted to fight against Spain, and he saw Queen Anne as an obstacle to his ambitions. He wanted the King to divorce or execute her, and if he knew that the Duke of Buckingham was visiting her, he would tell the King and achieve his goal. He had already managed to make relations between the King and Queen very bad.

	Queen Anne came into the room. She was about twenty-six years old and a very beautiful, though unhappy, woman. The Queen said she was not happy to see him and rejected his declaration of love. However, the Duke did not give up and cleverly managed to make it seem that she did at least care for him. He spoke about the previous times they had met. She reminded him of all the trouble those previous visits had caused, with all her friends being dismissed from the palace so that she was now very lonely. She only had one Spanish maid left. He replied that he was planning an alliance with the Protestants at La Rochelle, which would lead to a war against France, just so that he could see her again.

	"Thousands will die for my happiness," he said, "but I do not care. No man ever loved a woman more than I love you!"

	The Queen urged him to leave, but he would not go until she gave him a present. She gave him a small wooden box with twelve diamonds in it. He kissed her hand and left.

	Monsieur Bonacieux, meanwhile, was having a difficult time. When the police arrested him, they took him to a cell in the Bastille. He was very frightened. Two guards took him to a magistrate who told him that he was being charged with treason and sent him back to his cell. Monsieur Bonacieux was sure that he would be executed and could not sleep that night. The next day, he was taken back to the magistrate.

	"The Cardinal may forgive you if you confess everything," said the magistrate. Then he told him that his wife had escaped and was then abducted by D'Artagnan.

	"However," he said, "we have arrested D'Artagnan, and he is in prison."

	Monsieur Bonacieux would not believe him, and the magistrate ordered D'Artagnan to be brought to the room. When the guards returned with their prisoner, Monsieur Bonacieux was quickly able to tell them that the man they held was not D'Artagnan at all.

	It was Athos, whom the police had captured in D'Artagnan's rooms, believing him to be the man they wanted. The magistrate realized that the police had made a mistake and ordered the guards to put both men back in their cells.

	Monsieur Bonacieux sat in his cell all day, crying like a child.

	"They are going to kill me!" he cried.

	Late that night, the guards took him out of his cell and put him into a carriage. He was so afraid that he would die that he fainted. When the carriage stopped, the guards carried him into a room and left him on a couch. When he recovered, he was taken to another room and was questioned by the Cardinal himself. The Cardinal asked about Madame Bonacieux and soon realized that Monsieur Bonacieux was too timid to be an enemy. The Cardinal sent for his private spy, Count de Rochefort. When he entered the room, Bonacieux recognized him as the man who had kidnapped his wife.

	Bonacieux was immediately taken back to his cell. The Count de Rochefort told the Cardinal that the Duke of Buckingham had visited the Queen. One of the maids in the palace had seen them and had also realized that the small wooden box with the diamonds was missing. The Count de Rochefort thought the Queen had given them to the Duke of Buckingham, and the Cardinal agreed.

	The Count de Rochefort left, and the Cardinal brought Bonacieux back into his room. He gave him a bag with three hundred pistoles in it, much to the surprise of Monsieur Bonacieux. The Cardinal was pleased to make Monsieur Bonacieux his friend because he would do anything the Cardinal asked. He would even spy against his own wife.

	The Cardinal then turned to a large map of La Rochelle that he had on his table and studied it for a few minutes. When the Count de Rochefort returned, the Cardinal sat down and wrote a letter.

	"Call Vitray," he told the Count. "He must take this letter to London immediately."

	This is what the letter said:



	Milady,

	When the Duke of Buckingham next attends a ball, you must go there. He will be wearing twelve diamonds on his jacket. You must somehow get near to him and cut two of the diamonds off his jacket. Let me know as soon as you have them.



	Chapter seven

	The Keeper of the Seals

	Monsieur de Treville was worried about Athos. Aramis had asked for some leave to visit his family in Rouen, so Porthos and D'Artagnan reported Athos's arrest to Monsieur de Treville. Athos had been examined again. He told the magistrate that he was not D'Artagnan, that he had never met Monsieur or Madame Bonacieux, and that he was having dinner with Monsieur de Treville at the time when D'Artagnan fought the policemen and abducted Madame Bonacieux. Then he was taken to see the Cardinal. However, the Cardinal was visiting the King. He told the King that one of the Queen's closest friends, Madame de Chevreuse, whom the King had banished, was in Paris.

	"We were about to arrest Madame de Chevreuse's accomplice," he said, "when one of the musketeers fought against four policemen and rescued the accomplice."

	The King was furious.

	At that very moment, Monsieur de Treville arrived. He had failed to get Athos released and intended to ask the King to intervene. The King accused the musketeers of hindering the work of the Cardinal, but Monsieur de Treville was able to prove that Athos and D'Artagnan were innocent of the attack on the policemen.

	"Athos had dinner with me, and D'Artagnan came to visit me at that time, too. I remember the time clearly because it was earlier than I had thought."

	The Cardinal insisted that Athos be charged and taken to court, but eventually, he conceded defeat, and the King wrote a letter releasing Athos from prison. Monsieur de Treville took the letter to prison and came out with Athos. Then he sent a messenger to find D'Artagnan and tell him to come to his house.

	"You'd better be careful," he warned them. "The Cardinal is plotting against us, and you could end up in trouble."

	As soon as Monsieur de Treville had left the palace, the Cardinal told the King about the Duke of Buckingham's visit to Paris. When he heard this news, the King turned white with anger.

	"What was he doing here?" he shouted.

	"He was probably plotting something with the Protestants," replied the Cardinal.

	"No, I'm sure he was trying to insult me by visiting the Queen," said the King. He was much more worried about this personal insult than he was about any wars or other affairs of state.

	"I hate to think that what you are suggesting might be true," said the Cardinal, "but it reminds me of something. One of the maids said that the Queen hardly slept last night and spent almost the whole day writing letters today."

	"That proves it! She was obviously writing to the Duke of Buckingham. I must have those letters before she gives them to a messenger!"

	"But Sir, you cannot take the Queen's letters," protested the Cardinal. Of course, this was exactly what he wanted the King to do. The King fell into the Cardinal's trap.

	"Are you plotting against me, too, Cardinal? Are you on their side? I will have those letters!"

	The Cardinal told him that only the Keeper of the Seals was allowed to ask for letters from the Queen and search her rooms.

	"However," he added, "the Queen may not believe that he is acting on your orders."

	"I will go in and tell her myself!" shouted the King.

	The Queen was sitting with her ladies in waiting when the King burst into the room. He walked angrily to the Queen and told her that the Keeper of the Seals was coming to pay her a visit and that she was to obey his every request. He was acting on the King's authority.

	"What can he do that you cannot do yourself?" asked the Queen.

	The King did not answer but turned on his heel and left the room as angrily as he had entered it. As he left, the Keeper of the Seals arrived. He commanded the Queen to give him her keys. The Queen was insulted and very angry but gave him the keys. He searched through all the desk drawers but found no letters.

	"The King knows that you wrote a letter yesterday and that you have not given it to a messenger yet," he said, "so I must search for it and find it." He came closer to the Queen, stretching out his arm toward her. It was clear that he intended to search the Queen.

	"How can you dare to search the Queen?" asked the Queen.

	"I must do as the King has commanded," he replied and took a few steps closer.

	"Very well," she said. "I did write a letter, and I still have it."

	"If you do not give it to me, Your Highness, I will have to take it from you."

	"The King has ordered you to touch your Queen!?"

	"Forgive me, Your Highness, I am only following the King's orders."

	The Queen's eyes filled with tears of anger as the Keeper of the Seals took another two steps toward her.

	Suddenly, she put her hand into her dress and pulled out a letter.

	"Here's your letter, Sir! Take it and go!"

	The Keeper of the Seals took it and went straight to the King. The King quickly tore it open and read it. It was not a love letter but a letter to the Queen's brother, suggesting that he should declare war on France and get rid of the Cardinal. The King was delighted with the letter and showed it to the Cardinal.

	"Look," he said, "I was wrong, and you were right. There is no mention of love or of Buckingham in the letter. It is just a plot to get rid of you!"

	The Cardinal, of course, was not quite as happy as the King. He offered to resign, knowing that the King would never allow him to do that. Then he convinced the King that he had wronged the Queen and ought to do something to please her. At first, the King refused, but then he agreed to hold a ball for her. The King hated balls, but the Queen loved them.

	"Ask the Queen to wear the twelve diamonds you gave her," suggested the Cardinal.

	The King went to visit the Queen on the following day, and although he didn't apologize to her, he was friendly and told her that he would hold a ball soon. This was such a rare event in the poor Queen's life that it immediately cheered her up, and she began to ask the King for the date on which the ball would be held. He did not give her a date, however, but continually told her that it would be soon. The truth was that he was waiting for the Cardinal to set a date, and the Cardinal was waiting for a letter from Milady.

	A week after the Keeper of the Seals visited the Queen, the Cardinal received a letter from London.

	This is what it said:

	I have them, but I cannot leave London, as I have no money. Please send me five hundred pistoles, and I will be in Paris in four or five days.



	The next time the King asked the Cardinal whether he had set a date for the ball, the Cardinal counted the days on his fingers as he thought.

	"She said she can be here in four or five days, and it will take the messenger four or five days to get there. We should add a couple of days because things never work exactly as you plan them, so that makes about twelve days."

	Then he turned to the King and said, "The City Councillors are giving a ball on the third of October, and I think you and Her Majesty could go to it."

	Then he paused before adding, "Don't forget to ask her to wear those twelve diamonds you gave her, but don't ask her until the night before the ball."



	Chapter eight

	Who Will Go to London?

	The King wondered why the Cardinal had reminded him about the diamonds again, so he decided to visit the Queen and see whether he could find out what was happening. He opened the conversation as he usually did. He criticized her friends and complained about the things that they did in the palace, and the Queen listened quietly because she was used to these complaints. Eventually, however, she grew tired of it. She became annoyed and asked the King to stop complaining and tell her what he wanted. The King was surprised by her anger and told her that there was soon to be a ball, and he wanted her to wear the diamonds he had given her. Because he himself was now annoyed, he forgot that the Cardinal had asked him not to mention the diamonds until the night before the ball.

	The Queen was dismayed and almost fainted with terror. She imagined that the Cardinal knew everything and that he had told the King about the visit of the Duke of Buckingham and the fact that she had given him the diamonds before he left. She went very pale and supported herself by leaning on a small table. The King saw that she was badly affected by his question and enjoyed it without knowing the reason for it.

	"When is the ball to be held?" she asked weakly and in a trembling voice.

	"I am not sure," replied the King, "but I will ask the Cardinal."

	"Did the Cardinal propose the ball?" she asked, her eyes widening in fear.

	"Well, yes, he did," replied the King.

	"And did he also suggest that I should wear the diamonds?"

	"So what if it was? It is no crime for him to suggest that you wear the diamonds, is it?"

	The Queen almost fainted with fear as the King left the room. As soon as the door was closed, she sat down and began to cry.

	"The Cardinal knows everything, and he will tell the King soon, and he will destroy me, and I have no friends to help me, and I don't know what to do," she sobbed. She knelt down by a chair and began to pray and then to weep uncontrollably.

	"Is there anything I can do to help Your Majesty?"

	The Queen was surprised and afraid when she heard this voice and looked around to see where it came from since she thought that she was alone in the room. She saw Madame Bonacieux but did not recognize her immediately through the tears in her eyes. Madame Bonacieux had been hanging some dresses in the cupboard when the King had entered the room, and she had not dared to come out while he was there. Consequently, she had heard the entire conversation and now assured the Queen that she was her friend and was ready to do anything she could to help her.

	"You gave those diamonds that the King was talking about to the Duke of Buckingham, didn't you?"

	When the Queen realized that somebody else knew all about the diamonds, she began to tremble again, but Madame Bonacieux assured her again that she was a friend and that she would do whatever she could to get the diamonds back.

	"We need to send a message to the Duke of Buckingham as soon as we can," she said, "and ask him to return the diamonds as quickly as possible."

	"Yes, but I have nobody to send to London because the King and the Cardinal have sent all my friends away."

	"Your Highness, you can trust me to find a messenger for you. My husband is a very good man, and he will do anything I ask him to do without asking any questions."

	The Queen decided to trust her and wrote a letter for Monsieur Bonacieux to deliver to the Duke of Buckingham. She gave it to Madame Bonacieux and also gave her a valuable ring which had been given to her by her brother, the King of Spain, so that she would have some money to pay for her husband's journey to London.

	Madame Bonacieux hid the letter in her dress, and ten minutes later, she was home.

	There, she found her husband patiently waiting for her. She did not know that he had seen the Cardinal and had become one of his most loyal supporters, so when she told him that he could earn a lot of money by delivering a letter to London, she was surprised that he did not immediately agree. Monsieur Bonacieux thought of himself as a friend of the Cardinal who did not need to earn money by doing such difficult tasks. He began to boast about being the great Cardinal's personal friend and showed his wife the bag with money that the Cardinal had given him.

	Madame Bonacieux persisted in asking him to take the letter to London, but he refused. She threatened him, saying that she would get the Queen to arrest him and put him in the Bastille, but he was more afraid of the Cardinal than of the Queen, and he continued to refuse. However, he suddenly remembered that the Cardinal and Count de Rochefort had asked him to get as much information from his wife as possible. He tried to find out more about the letter, but as soon as he began to ask questions, Madame Bonacieux became suspicious and told him no more. Monsieur Bonacieux left the house, saying he had to visit a friend.

	Madame Bonacieux sat in the room, wondering what to do next. She had promised the Queen that her husband would do it. As she sat there, she heard a voice from the ceiling. It was D'Artagnan, who had been listening to the conversation with his ear to the floor.

	"Madame Bonacieux, please let me into your room, and I will help you!"



	Chapter nine

	A Message for the Duke

	D'Artagnan had heard the conversation between his landlord and Madame Bonacieux and soon convinced Madame Bonacieux to give him the letter to deliver to London. He was very excited. Madame Bonacieux gave him the bag of money that the Cardinal had given her husband. As he was about to leave, they heard voices outside. It was Monsieur Bonacieux and the Count de Rochefort! When D'Artagnan saw the Count de Rochefort, he recognized the man from Meung and wanted to go and fight him. Madame Bonacieux convinced him to stay out of sight because he was on a mission for the Queen. They quickly ran to D'Artagnan's room and hid there.

	They heard the Count de Rochefort tell Monsieur Bonacieux that he had been foolish to let the opportunity slip, and Monsieur Bonacieux said he would go to the palace and find his wife. He was sure that she would still give him the letter if he promised to take it to London. Of course, he would give it to the Count de Rochefort instead. The Count de Rochefort left, and then Monsieur Bonacieux discovered that his money had disappeared. He howled very loudly and ran down the street. This gave D'Artagnan the opportunity to leave the house, too, and he went straight to Monsieur de Treville's house to tell him that he had to leave for London immediately on a mission for the Queen. Monsieur de Treville did not question him about it but insisted that he take the three musketeers with him.

	D'Artagnan went to Aramis's house and found him worried about the lady who was no longer there. D'Artagnan realized that she was the Queen's friend, Madame de Chevreuse, and told Aramis that she had left. He should not worry about her. Then they went to Athos's and Porthos's houses, and soon all four young men were ready for the trip to London. D'Artagnan told them that the letter was in his jacket pocket and that if he was killed, one of them should take the letter and bring it to London. If that person was killed, another musketeer should take the letter. It was very important that the letter reach London, and the Cardinal was sure to try and stop them.

	It was two o'clock in the morning when the four young adventurers and their four servants left Paris on their horses. They rode to Chantilly, where they had some breakfast. Another traveller was dining there, and he proposed a toast to the Cardinal. Then Porthos proposed a toast to the King, but the traveller did not like the King, and soon he challenged Porthos to a duel. The others decided not to wait for him.

	"Finish him off, and come after us," said Athos.

	At Beauvais, they waited two hours for Porthos, but he did not come. The horses were rested, and they continued on their way. About a mile past Beauvais, the road became narrow and some workmen had blocked it. As the adventurers tried to pass them, the workmen began to throw stones and even shoot at them. Aramis was injured, and his servant fell off his horse. Aramis managed to ride on, but the servant could not get back on his horse. They rode on, but at Crevecoeur, Aramis declared that he could go no further. They left him and one of the servants at an inn there, which meant that there were now only two masters and two servants. They rode on to Amiens, which they reached at midnight, and stayed at the Golden Lily Inn.

	They slept well, but in the morning, they were attacked by the inn keeper and his friends, who accused them of passing false money. D'Artagnan and Planchet managed to escape by stealing two horses and galloping away. Athos would have to look after himself. D'Artagnan and Planchet rode on to St. Omer, where they rested their horses before continuing to Calais.

	They went to the harbor and found another man who wanted to sail to England. An official was telling him that the Cardinal made a new rule requiring travellers to England to have a permit.

	"I am the Count de Wardes, and I have a permit for myself and my servant Lubin!" said the man.

	"Good. Then you will need to get it signed by the Governor of the Port. He lives over there." The official pointed to a house a little distance away.

	They began to walk toward the Governor's house with D'Artagnan and Planchet following them. Before they got to the house, D'Artagnan attacked Count de Wardes and stole his permit while Planchet attacked Lubin. Then they tied them up and left them in a ditch and took the permit to the Governor.

	"I am the Count de Wardes, and I have a permit for myself and my servant Lubin to travel to England," he told the Governor, who believed him and signed the permit.

	"The Cardinal is trying to stop one particular person from going to England," said the Governor.

	"Yes, I know," replied D'Artagnan. "His name is D'Artagnan." He gave the Governor a description of Count de Wardes and told him to arrest him if he saw him.

	D'Artagnan and Planchet returned to the harbor and were just in time to board the ship that was sailing to England that evening. D'Artagnan had been injured in the fight for the permit, and he was pleased to rest and sleep that night. The ship arrived in Dover early the next morning, and from there, D'Artagnan and Planchet made their way to London. They could not speak English but managed to find where the Duke of Buckingham lived by writing his name on a piece of paper and showing it to people. Unfortunately, the Duke of Buckingham was out hunting with the King, near Windsor castle. D'Artagnan went there and gave the letter to him. The Duke read the letter and turned white.

	"This is terrible! It is very serious!" he cried. "We must go to Paris immediately!"

	He told his servant to apologize to the King and tell him that he had to return to London urgently on a matter of life and death. Then he and D'Artagnan galloped away to London at breakneck speed.

	On the way to London, D'Artagnan told the Duke of Buckingham all about his journey. When the two speeding horsemen reached London, the Duke of Buckingham did not slow down but continued at breakneck speed down the crowded streets, knocking people over and never looking to see whether or not they were injured.

	When they reached the Duke's house, D'Artagnan had trouble keeping up with his new friend as they walked quickly through the passages and rooms. D'Artagnan was very impressed with the quality of the magnificent furniture in the rooms. They came to a bedroom and passed through it into a smaller room, where the Duke of Buckingham had a large picture of Queen Anne. On a shelf underneath it there was a small wooden box which contained a blue ribbon with the diamonds pinned to it. As he was showing it to D'Artagnan, he realized that two of the diamonds were missing, which made him very alarmed. Where could they be? It was clear that they had been stolen because they had been cut off with a pair of scissors.

	"I've only worn them once," he said to D'Artagnan, "and that was at the ball at Windsor last week. I am sure that Lady de Winter took them. She was very friendly to me, and I was surprised because we had had an argument recently. Not only that, she is a great admirer of the Cardinal and would do anything for him."

	The ball in Paris was still five days away, and the Duke of Buckingham called his jeweller and commanded him to cut two more diamonds to match those on his blue ribbon. Then he called his secretary and commanded that no ships should leave England until further notice. If the Chancellor or the King wanted to know the reason for this, he was to tell them that he was preparing for war against France. D'Artagnan was astonished that a man could have so much power and use it as he pleased, even to the extent of declaring war so that he could make sure that the Queen would receive her diamonds in time for the ball.



	Chapter ten

	The Councillors' Ball

	Two days later, the replacement diamonds were ready, and they were perfect. It was impossible to see that they were not the original diamonds that had been stolen. The Duke of Buckingham gave D'Artagnan the diamonds and told him how to get to France and where he should go in France to obtain good horses. He told D'Artagnan the password that would ensure that the Duke's friends would help him get back to Paris as quickly as possible.

	"What about the box?" asked D'Artagnan. "Am I to return the diamonds without the box?"

	"Yes," said the Duke of Buckingham. "I want to keep the box, because it is all I have left now, and I am sure that simply wearing the diamonds to the ball will satisfy the King and dismay the Cardinal."

	D'Artagnan made his way back to France. As his ship left the harbour at Dover, he thought he saw a woman he had seen before, sitting on another ship which was waiting for permission to leave. He thought it was the woman he had seen in the carriage at Meung, to whom his enemy had spoken.

	When he arrived in France, he found that using the password given to him by the Duke of Buckingham made his journey back to Paris much easier than the journey to London had been. There were fresh horses waiting for him at every stop. As soon as he arrived in Paris, he went to see Monsieur de Treville to report on his safe return.

	The next day was the day of the Councillors' Ball, when all the most important people in Paris, and even people who merely thought they were important, put on their best clothes and went to the Town Hall.

	It was already late when the King arrived at the ball, but the Queen was even later. As soon as she arrived, the King noticed that she was not wearing her diamonds. He approached her and demanded that she tell him why she was not wearing the diamonds that he had asked her to wear. She told him that she was afraid she might lose them but that she could send for them and put them on if he insisted. The Cardinal, of course, was watching all this very closely and seemed to be very happy. He gave the two diamonds that Milady had stolen from the Duke of Buckingham to the King.

	"If she comes back wearing the diamonds, which I doubt, you will notice that two of them are missing," he said. "Give her these, and ask her if she remembers who stole them."

	The King was surprised but just then, the Queen returned, and he had no time to question the Cardinal about the two diamonds. He looked at the Queen and noticed that she was wearing her diamonds. He was very pleased, but the Cardinal scowled. The Queen was dancing and kept moving around, so that neither the King nor the Cardinal could count the number of diamonds she was wearing. Were there twelve or only ten? At the end of the dance, the King approached her and gave her the two diamonds the Cardinal had given him.

	"I understand that you have lost two diamonds," he said, "so I am giving you two new ones."

	"But then I will have fourteen!" exclaimed the Queen.

	The King counted the diamonds and saw that there were twelve.

	"Why did you give me these two diamonds?" he asked the Cardinal. The Cardinal was ready with his answer.

	"I wanted to give the Queen a present and thought this might be an amusing way to do it."

	The Queen smiled at him very politely. "Thank you, Your Eminence! I am sure that these two diamonds must have cost you a lot!"

	Later that night, Madame Bonacieux took D'Artagnan to the Queen's private dressing room. There, the Queen gave him a ring and allowed him to kiss her hand. She did this by putting her hand through the door to a dark room, where D'Artagnan was waiting. The Queen did not see D'Artagnan or speak to him, but he knew that she was grateful.

	D'Artagnan was sure that Madame Bonacieux would also be very kind to him since he was now quite sure that she loved him. However, all she told him was that there would be a letter for him at his home. He rushed home to find that Planchet was waiting for him.

	"Your room was locked," he told D'Artagnan, "but this letter found its way in. I think it is a dangerous letter because letters don't come into locked rooms all by themselves."

	D'Artagnan, however, read the letter and laughed at Planchet.

	"This is a very nice letter," he said. "It is the best letter I have ever received!" It was from Madame Constance Bonacieux and invited him to meet her that night at ten o'clock near the Summerhouse at St. Cloud. It was the first time D'Artagnan had received a love letter, and he was very excited and happy. He did not care about Planchet's warning.

	As he left the house later that morning, he saw Monsieur Bonacieux standing near the door and decided to go and speak to him. He boasted about his love letter and his meeting that night without, of course, telling him that he was meeting with Madame Bonacieux! He thought it was an excellent joke. Then he went to visit Monsieur de Treville and discovered that none of the three musketeers had returned to Paris yet. Monsieur de Treville saw the ring that the Queen had given D'Artagnan and warned him to be very careful with it.

	"In fact," he added, "you should take it to a jeweller immediately and sell it. It is too dangerous to wear!"

	But D'Artagnan would not think about selling the ring that the Queen had given him. Monsieur de Treville wanted D'Artagnan to go and find the three musketeers, and he promised that he would begin the next day.

	"I have an important meeting tonight," he said. "I will go tomorrow."

	Monsieur de Treville guessed that it was a love meeting and warned D'Artagnan to be very careful.

	"The Cardinal often uses women to trap his enemies," he warned.

	However, D'Artagnan was not worried, although he did ask Planchet to come with him and to have his guns ready.



	Chapter eleven

	Kidnapped!

	D'Artagnan did not return to his house that day until nine o'clock. Then he found that Planchet had prepared everything according to his instructions and was ready to accompany him to St. Cloud. Planchet was still unhappy about the letter and again tried to warn his master. However, D'Artagnan would not listen, and they rode on in the darkness. They came to a little village, where D'Artagnan told Planchet to stop with the horses and wait for him to return. He gave him some money so that he could stay at an inn, and Planchet went off, still complaining about the letter.

	D'Artagnan walked through the forest to St. Cloud and soon found the summerhouse mentioned in Madame Bonacieux' letter. He waited. He heard the clock strike ten o'clock, which was the time of the meeting, and he was very excited. However, nothing happened, and nobody came. He waited an hour and then looked into the summerhouse. He was surprised to find broken furniture, broken dishes, some torn pieces of clothing, and even some blood stains. There had been a struggle there recently, and D'Artagnan was worried. He found one of the neighbors, a very old and timid man, who told him that a lady had come to the summerhouse and that soon afterward, some men came on horses and with a carriage. They went into the summerhouse, and he heard the lady scream and shout. Eventually, she stopped, and he saw the men carry her out and put her into the carriage before riding away. He described the men for D'Artagnan, who realized that one of them was the Count de Rochefort, the agent of the Cardinal and his enemy from Meung.

	D'Artagnan did not know what to do. He went back to the village to look for Planchet but could not find him, and he ended up sleeping in one of the inns. Early in the morning, he found Planchet, and they rode back to Paris. D'Artagnan was certain that it was Madame Bonacieux who had been abducted by the men, and he decided to tell Monsieur de Treville the whole story and ask for his advice.

	Monsieur de Treville thought for a moment and then advised D'Artagnan to leave Paris as soon as possible.

	"I'll tell the Queen about the kidnapping," he said, "but you had better go and find the three musketeers."

	As D'Artagnan walked back to his house, he saw Monsieur Bonacieux and suddenly realized that his landlord had helped the Cardinal's men kidnap his own wife. He went up to his room, where Planchet told him that Monsieur de Cavois, the Captain of the Cardinal's guards, had visited the house looking for D'Artagnan. He had left a message with Planchet: "Tell your master that His Eminence the Cardinal thinks highly of him and would like to meet him."

	Planchet had told him that D'Artagnan was not at home because he had gone to Troyes.

	"That's excellent work, Planchet!" said D'Artagnan. He didn't want to see the Cardinal. He was sure that the Cardinal would arrest him and put him in prison.

	"And now we are leaving Paris because I would like to know what has happened to the three musketeers."

	The Duke of Buckingham had allowed D'Artagnan to keep the beautiful horses he had used on his return journey from London, and now he and Planchet took those horses with them in their search for the musketeers. D'Artagnan also took with him a letter which had arrived for Aramis. It was scented and addressed in an elegant hand.

	They rode to Chantilly, where they had left Porthos dueling with another traveller on their journey to London. D'Artagnan talked to the innkeeper and discovered that Porthos had been injured in the duel and was still in his room, trying to recover. The landlord was not very happy about it because Porthos had not paid for his accommodation, and all his requests for payment had been ignored. Porthos had lost all his money gambling and had written to a duchess asking her to send him some money. The innkeeper had asked one of his staff to deliver the letter personally, and so, had discovered that the lady was not a duchess at all but the fifty-year-old wife of a lawyer. When she read the letter, she flew into a rage, claiming that Porthos had been injured in a fight over another woman. She had refused to send him any money. The traveller who had injured Porthos, the innkeeper recalled, was really looking for a man called D'Artagnan.

	D'Artagnan discovered all this before he went to Porthos's room. There he found the invalid and his servant, who had been stealing food to supplement the small meals the landlord would give them. Porthos pretended that he had not been wounded in the duel but had fallen and hurt his knee and that he was only waiting for money from his friend, the duchess. He wanted to hear all about D'Artagnan's adventures, of course, and D'Artagnan told him about the trip to London but did not mention anything about what had happened in Paris. Then he went back to the innkeeper and paid Porthos's account. He left one of the horses at the inn for Porthos before setting off to find Aramis.

	Aramis, of course, had been wounded by the workmen at the side of the road, and D'Artagnan had left him at Crevecoeur to recover. Now he rode there with Planchet and the spare horses. As he rode along, he began to worry about Madame Bonacieux and wondered what had happened to her.

	When he arrived at Crevecoeur, he soon found that Aramis was still at the inn where they had left him. However, he was very busy talking to two priests, and he told D'Artagnan that he was leaving the world and becoming a monk. D'Artagnan was amazed and couldn't believe his ears. Would Aramis really give up being a musketeer and become a monk instead? It seemed to be true because the two priests were giving him advice about the thesis he should write before entering the monastery. D'Artagnan tried to reason with him and change his mind, but Aramis would not listen. Then D'Artagnan realized the cause of this sudden decision to enter the monastery and knew how to fix the problem.

	"Well, let's not talk anymore about your wish to be a monk," said D'Artagnan. "Now I can burn this letter that was for you."

	"What letter?" cried Aramis, eagerly.

	"It must be from some heartbroken, beautiful young woman," replied D'Artagnan.

	He pulled the scented letter that he had brought with him from his pocket, gave it to Aramis, and stood back to see what would happen. He didn't have to wait for long. Aramis was very happy because the letter was from Madame de Chevreuse. When he had read it, Aramis hugged D'Artagnan and told him that he had changed his mind about becoming a monk.

	"She still loves me!" he exclaimed. "Isn't life wonderful?"

	However, his shoulder was still too sore for him to ride a horse, though he was very grateful when he saw the fine horse that D'Artagnan had brought for him. Of course, D'Artagnan had to tell him all about his adventures, which he did while they had a splendid meal together.



	Chapter twelve

	The Musketeers Reunite

	The next morning, D'Artagnan set out for Amiens. Aramis wanted to accompany him but was still too ill to ride a horse. He had no sooner mounted his new horse than he fell off it again, pale with pain. He said he would stay in Crevecoeur and write poetry for his mistress, Madame de Chevreuse. D'Artagnan promised to return on his way back to Paris and set off with Planchet.

	D'Artagnan was quite worried about Athos because he was often sad and depressed, especially when he had been drinking. He knew that Athos was a good fighter and had probably beaten the men who had accused them of passing false money, but he thought it was very strange that Athos had not caught up with him, nor returned to either Aramis or Porthos. Had he been injured or even killed this time? D'Artagnan did not like to think about it because Athos had become his best friend. When he arrived at Amiens, he went immediately to the inn where they had stayed. He confronted the innkeeper, who remembered him, and demanded to know what had happened to Athos.

	The innkeeper apologized for attacking them. "Some officials told us we should look out for men who were passing false money. They gave us descriptions of these men, and we recognized you, so we had to arrest you."

	D'Artagnan could guess who these officials were, but this did not answer his important question. "Where is Athos?" he repeated.

	The innkeeper told him about the fight. "Athos shot two men with his muskets and then kept the others at bay with his sword, while he retreated to the cellar. The door was open, and he darted in and closed the door behind him, and then he even barricaded it. We knew he could not escape from there, so we left him there. I went to the Governor to tell him what had happened, but he didn't know anything about it. He told me I had captured the wrong man. I went back to the prisoner in the cellar, but he would not come out unless I allowed his servant to come in with him first. We were only too happy to allow this. When the servant went in, he barricaded the door again, and he is still there now!"

	"You've kept him locked in the cellar all this time?!" roared D'Artagnan.

	"No, he has kept himself in the cellar. I hope you can make him come out! All my good wine is in there, and a lot of good food, too, and he won't let me have it. I cannot serve my guests, and I am losing money. Please get him out before I am ruined!"

	Suddenly, they heard a lot of noise. Two English guests had arrived and wanted some wine. When they were told that the wine was in the cellar but could not be brought out, they decided to get it themselves by breaking down the cellar door. D'Artagnan was ready to fight them but then spoke to them reasonably and convinced them to wait in their rooms while he obtained some wine for them. Then he convinced Athos to open the door. The cellar was a mess! There were pools of wine and cooking oil on the floor. Pieces of bones and fat floated in the pools. These were the remains of the hams and sausages Athos and Grimaud, his servant, had eaten. There were empty and broken wine bottles everywhere. A barrel of wine stood in the middle of the cellar, with wine flowing from its open tap onto the ground. The innkeeper cried out in despair and wanted to fight, but Athos ordered some wine. He and Grimaud were very drunk.

	That night, D'Artagnan told Athos about his love for Constance Bonacieux and his fears for her safety. Athos was still very drunk and told D'Artagnan a terrible story.

	"My friend was an important man in a small village. A new priest came to the village with his young and beautiful sister. The important man fell in love with the girl and married her, although she was poor. Not long after the wedding, he discovered that she had been branded on the shoulder. She was a thief, and my friend soon found out that the priest was not her brother but her lover. They had tricked him, and he was so angry that he hanged the girl, but the priest escaped. That is what happens when you fall in love with a woman!"

	As Athos continued to talk about it, D'Artagnan realized that he was not talking about a friend but about himself! D'Artagnan was appalled. The next morning, Athos woke him up and wanted to know if he could remember the story.

	"I tell some very strange stories when I am drunk," he said. "I will never get drunk again."

	It was clear from the way he looked at D'Artagnan, however, that he realized he had said too much and that D'Artagnan knew his secret. He changed the subject.

	"Thanks for the wonderful horse you brought for me," he said. "Unfortunately, I saw the Englishmen early this morning and gambled with them, and I am afraid I lost the horse."

	D'Artagnan was very annoyed, but Athos had not finished his story yet.

	"I tried to get my horse back by holding yours with a stake, but I lost that too!"

	Now D'Artagnan was angry. He couldn't believe that anybody could be so stupid and was sure that Athos was joking.

	Athos continued. "I tried to get both horses back by staking your ring, which the Englishmen had noticed and considered very valuable."

	D'Artagnan turned white.

	"I lost that too," said Athos, "and then I staked Grimaud. The Englishmen thought he was a good servant and wanted to have him. Fortunately, my luck changed, and I won back the ring."

	D'Artagnan began to laugh, but Athos had still not come to the end of his story.

	"I thought my luck had changed, so I staked the ring again, and I won back the harnesses and then both the horses, but then I lost them all again, except the ring, and in the end I won back the harnesses but not the horses."

	"What's the use of the harnesses without the horses?" cried D'Artagnan.

	"I have a plan for that. I think you should stake the harnesses for your horse."

	At first D'Artagnan refused, but Athos finally persuaded him to try.

	"If you lose, you only lose the harnesses, and as you said yourself, they're of no use without the horses to put them on."

	They went to find the Englishmen, who agreed to the bet, and they gambled. D'Artagnan won, but Athos persuaded him to take one hundred pistoles instead of the horse.

	Athos and D'Artagnan left Amiens, riding their servants' donkeys, while the two servants walked, carrying the harnesses. At Crevecoeur, they found that Aramis had sold his horse to pay his debts. However, Aramis was well enough to travel, and they went on to Chantilly to pick up Porthos.

	Porthos had also recovered and was just sitting down to dinner at a table set for four. He welcomed them cheerfully and explained that he had invited some guests who had just sent a message to say they were not able to come. It was a wonderful meal, and they were all enjoying it when Athos suddenly said, "Do you all know what you are eating, gentlemen?"

	"Veal," said D'Artagnan, "and it is delicious!"

	"Lamb," said Porthos, "and it is excellent!"

	"Chicken," said Aramis, "and it is wonderful! Enjoy it, everybody!"

	"You are all wrong because you are all eating horse," said Athos.

	Of course, the meat was not horse meat, but Porthos understood what Athos meant and confessed that he had sold his wonderful new horse. Now none of them had a horse, although all of them had kept their harnesses and saddles. They added up the money that each of them had and discovered that they had four hundred and sixty five livres with them.

	When they arrived in Paris, each of them had a letter from Monsieur de Treville, telling them that the King was beginning a military operation, or a campaign, at La Rochelle on the first of May and that they all needed to buy their equipment as soon as they could. This equipment would cost about two thousand livres for each musketeer.



	Chapter thirteen

	Porthos and D'Artagnan Go to Church

	D'Artagnan was worried because he had to get enough money to buy some good equipment for the campaign, but he was also worried about Madame Bonacieux because nothing had been heard about her yet. Athos was not worried, although he had no equipment or money. He was determined to stay in his room and let the money and equipment come to him.

	"If it doesn't come," he said, "I will go and pick a quarrel with four or five of the Cardinal's guards or Englishmen. If I fight four or five of them at once, I am sure to be killed, and then everybody will praise me because I died in the King's service. I will have done my fighting without buying any equipment."

	Porthos and Aramis tried to make some plans, and with D'Artagnan, they walked the streets of Paris looking for ways of getting some money.

	One day, D'Artagnan saw Porthos going toward a church and decided to follow him. Porthos went into the church where the priest was delivering a long sermon. Porthos leaned against a wall in the church, quite close to where a woman was sitting. This woman looked about fifty years old and wore a black dress, and D'Artagnan guessed that she was the wife of the lawyer that had refused to send Porthos money when he was laid up in Chantilly. Porthos looked at this woman from the corner of his eye and then began to look earnestly at all the younger and more beautiful women in the church. He was particularly interested in a beautiful young lady who had a little boy to carry her cushion and a maid to carry her bag. The woman in the black dress kept looking at Porthos, but he pretended not to see her. Eventually, she coughed so loudly that everybody in the church turned to look at her, except Porthos.

	D'Artagnan was surprised to recognize the beautiful young lady with the cushion. It was the lady who was in the carriage at Meung, whom the man with the scar had called Milady and whom he had later seen on a ship ready to sail from England to France.

	At the conclusion of the sermon, Porthos greeted the beautiful young lady, and she smiled at him. D'Artagnan understood that Porthos's plan was to make the lawyer's wife jealous, and it worked. She came up behind Porthos and greeted him in an annoyed voice. Porthos pretended to be surprised.

	"Well, well, fancy seeing you here. What a surprise! How is your husband Madame Coquenard? Why didn't I see you in the church?

	"You didn't see me in the church because you were too busy looking at all the beautiful young ladies, especially one of them!"

	"Ah, so you noticed. That young lady has a very jealous husband, and she comes to this church just to get away from him and to see me. She is a duchess."

	"You are very much the ladies' man, aren't you, Monsieur Porthos?"

	"It is only natural that somebody with my good looks should enjoy a good measure of success in that direction."

	"How quickly men forget!"

	"Not as quickly as the ladies," replied Porthos. "You forgot me quickly enough when I was injured in Chantilly and needed some money, despite the fact that I have done so much for you in the past!"

	Now Madame Coquenard was ashamed, which was exactly what Porthos wanted.

	"It was my husband's fault because he would not allow me to have that much money."

	"I wrote to you first because of the letters you had written to me. I could have written to my friend, the duchess, and she would have given me the money immediately."

	"I am sorry, Monsieur Porthos. I hope that you will ask me again if you need money on another occasion, and I will do better. I promise."

	But Porthos was not finished. He continued to talk to Madame Coquenard and make her feel guilty. Then he told her that he was going on a campaign soon and may be killed. This made her feel even worse.

	"I am soon going to visit my family in Brittany," he said, "to get some money for the campaign, and that beautiful young duchess you saw me looking at in the church is travelling with me because she is a neighbor of ours, and it is more pleasant to travel together than to travel alone."

	Eventually, poor Madame Coquenard was so afraid, jealous, and ashamed that she invited Porthos to come and have dinner with her and her husband the next day, and Porthos accepted. He thought his plan was working well. She told him to say that he was her aunt's son.

	D'Artagnan, meanwhile, had followed Milady out of the church and heard her tell the coach driver to go to Saint-Germain. Then he went back to his own room and told Planchet to get two horses from the stables. While Planchet was away, D'Artagnan went to see Athos and told him about Porthos and the lawyer's wife. Planchet arrived with the two horses, and Athos wanted to know why D'Artagnan was going to Saint-Germain. D'Artagnan told him that he had seen Milady and wanted to follow her.

	"So now you love her as much as you loved poor Madame Bonacieux only a few days ago!" said Athos. "Actually, you are probably doing the right thing. It's a waste of time to look for a woman who has been kidnapped. It is much easier to find another one!"

	D'Artagnan assured him that he did not love Milady as he loved Madame Bonacieux but that he did want to find out more about her.

	D'Artagnan and Planchet rode out to Saint-Germain. They saw a house on a bend in the road and noticed a man standing near the gate. Planchet recognized him. It was Lubin, the servant of the Count de Wardes, whose permit they had stolen at Calais, so D'Artagnan told Planchet to go and talk to him and find out whether his master was dead or not. Lubin did not recognize Planchet and soon the two men were chatting near the gate. As D'Artagnan waited for Planchet to return, a carriage arrived, and he saw Milady inside it with her maid.

	The maid, a pretty girl of about twenty years old, jumped out of the carriage with an envelope. Just then, Lubin was called away, leaving Planchet standing alone near the gate. The maid came and gave him the envelope.

	"For your master," she said.

	Planchet was surprised but took the letter, and the girl went back to the carriage, which drove away. Planchet brought the letter to D'Artagnan, who soon discovered that it was a love letter for the Count de Wardes.

	"Somebody who is interested in you would like to know if you are well enough to go for a walk in the forest."

	Then it told him how to send a reply.

	"So the Count is alive!" said D'Artagnan, and this was quickly confirmed by Planchet.

	D'Artagnan and Planchet followed the coach and soon caught up with it. It had stopped on the road, and a well-dressed man on horseback was talking to Milady through the window. Milady looked annoyed, but the gentleman laughed, which only made her angrier.

	D'Artagnan interrupted their conversation, which annoyed the gentleman on horseback, and soon they agreed to fight a duel. The gentleman told him that his name was Lord de Winter and that Milady was his sister. They set a time and place for their duel.

	"I suppose you have some English friends in Paris who would like to take your side," suggested D'Artagnan.

	They agreed on three friends each, and D'Artagnan rode back to Paris to enlist the aid of the musketeers.



	Chapter fourteen

	A Fight, a Feast, and a Friendly Maid

	Lord de Winter and his three English friends arrived and announced their names. Two of them were the Englishmen with whom Athos had gambled in Amiens. The musketeers announced their names as Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.

	Lord de Winter said that they could not fight men who did not have real names. "These are just the names of mythical shepherds," he said, "and we are gentlemen who can only fight other gentlemen."

	The musketeers admitted that these were not their real names. The Englishmen insisted that the musketeers reveal their true names, so each of them took one Englishman aside and whispered his name to him. The Englishmen were satisfied, but Athos toldhis opponent that he should not have asked his name.

	"Now I will have to kill you," he said. "I am supposed to be dead, and I have good reasons for not letting anybody know that I am alive."

	The eight men began to fight, and it wasn't long before Athos had killed his man. Porthos wounded his man in the thigh, and Aramis's man surrendered. D'Artagnan disarmed Lord de Winter, who then fell over. D'Artagnan put his sword against the English Lord's throat.

	"I could kill you now," he cried, "but I will spare you for your sister's sake because I love her!"

	The dead man had a heavy purse attached to his belt, and Porthos gave it to Lord de Winter to give to the man's family.

	"They won't want it," he said, "because they are already very rich. Why don't you give it to your servants?"

	Athos, however, had a different idea and gave it to the Englishmen's servants instead. Everybody, except of course the musketeers' servants, thought this was a very generous act. Lord de Winter promised to introduce D'Artagnan to his sister that evening.

	D'Artagnan was very excited at the prospect of meeting Milady and talked to Athos about it.

	"Have you forgotten Madame Bonacieux so quickly?" asked Athos.

	"I love Madame Bonacieux with my heart, and I love Milady with my head," replied D'Artagnan.

	Athos warned him that she was an agent of the Cardinal and that he should not trust her. However, Lord de Winter arrived and took D'Artagnan to meet his sister, who received him graciously. When Lord de Winter told her the story of the fight, she seemed delighted, but D'Artagnan noticed that she tapped the floor with her foot, which showed that she was actually very angry. She told D'Artagnan that Lord de Winter was actually her brother-in-law rather than her brother. She had married his younger brother, who had died and left her a widow with one child. If Lord de Winter did not marry, this child would inherit the family fortune. From the way that she spoke French, D'Artagnan was certain that she was not English. She was French.

	At last, it was time for him to leave. At the head of the stairs, he saw the pretty maid who had been in the coach with Milady. She accidentally brushed against his arm and apologized.

	The next day, D'Artagnan called on Milady again, and she was much friendlier this time. She asked him a lot of questions about his past and whether or not he liked the Cardinal. D'Artagnan remembered what Athos had told him, so he told Milady that he thought very highly of the Cardinal and would have entered his service had it not been for the fact that he knew Monsieur de Treville and had therefore decided to join the musketeers as soon as he could.

	He visited Milady every day, and every day, he saw the pretty maid who seemed to make sure that she smiled at him or touched him accidentally.

	Porthos, meanwhile, was very pleased with himself. He looked forward eagerly to visiting Madame Coquenard at her home. He thought that he would get the money he needed for the equipment, and that as a relative, he would be invited to dinner every day until the campaign. Madame Coquenard had told him that her husband was seventy-five years old, so he was also hoping that this old man might die soon and that he could then marry Madame Coquenard and get his hands on her money. However, he was going to be disappointed.

	The house was in a dark, narrow street, and the door was opened by a tall clerk with a pale face and dirty hair. Behind him stood a short clerk and behind him, another tall clerk. Behind them all stood a message boy. Then he was welcomed by Madame Coquenard, who led him across several rooms to the sitting room, where he met Monsieur Coquenard. The old lawyer was not able to get out of his chair and was not pleased to see his visitor. Porthos soon realized that he would not be having dinner at this house every day.

	When dinner was served, it was a very poor meal. The clerks waited to be served and looked hungrily at the soup, licking their lips. The old lawyer looked at the soup, too, and declared that it was a very good soup. Porthos thought it the weakest and thinnest soup that he had ever seen. The same thing happened with the boiled chicken that followed it. Monsieur Coquenard complained that his wife was too generous in preparing such a feast for her cousin, but Porthos thought the chicken was probably the oldest chicken in Paris. It was nothing more than skin and bones. The clerks looked at this chicken even more hungrily than they had looked at the soup. Porthos was astonished. Madame Coquenard gave her husband the feet, herself the head and neck, and Porthos a wing. The three clerks received nothing and said nothing. They watched the servant carry the rest of the chicken back to the kitchen. He soon returned with a large plate of beans with some bones, and each of the clerks received a small portion of this dish.

	At the conclusion of the meal, Monsieur Coquenard congratulated his wife. "That was an excellent meal. I haven't eaten so well in years!"

	Porthos shuddered.

	After dinner, Madame Coquenard spoke to him about what he needed to buy before he could go on the campaign. She said she was able to provide a horse for him and another for his servant, as well as an old traveling bag that her husband no longer required. She agreed to lend him eight hundred livres and invited him to come and have dinner with them three times a week until the campaign. Porthos declined the offer and went home hungry and annoyed.

	D'Artagnan was beginning to really fall in love with Milady and began to believe that one day she might love him, too. One day, he arrived at her house and was met by Kitty, the pretty young maid, who requested to speak to him. She led him to her room, which was connected to Milady's room and told him that Milady didn't love him. D'Artagnan was very surprised. Kitty showed him a letter which Milady had written to the Count de Wardes, which showed that she loved him and wanted him to love her in return. D'Artagnan was hurt, but also realized that Kitty loved him. He spent the evening with her and then hid in the cupboard when Milady came in. He heard her tell Kitty that she did not love D'Artagnan but hated him for the trouble he had caused her and for not killing Lord de Winter, which would have given her a large inheritance.

	"I'd like to take revenge on him," she said, "but so far, all I have been able to do is kidnap that stupid draper's wife that he loved."

	D'Artagnan was really angry, but he became even more upset when he heard her say that she loved the Count de Wardes. He decided to use Kitty to get revenge on Milady. He convinced her that he loved her and asked her to bring any other letters that Milady sent to the Count de Wardes to him instead, and she easily agreed. He replied to one of these letters, pretending to be the Count de Wardes and arranging to meet with her one evening. He thought that by going there and confronting her, he would be able to embarrass her and force her to tell him where Constance Bonacieux was being kept.



	Chapter fifteen

	Milady's Secret

	The three musketeers and D'Artagnan had dinner together once a week. This dinner was always held at Athos's house because he refused to leave it. He was waiting for his equipment to come to him. During one of these dinners, Porthos's servant, Mousqueton, came and told him that he should go home. Then Aramis's servant, Bazin, came and told Aramis the same thing. Each of these musketeers returned to their homes.

	Aramis found a man waiting for him, and this man had an important message to deliver from a lady in Tours. Aramis guessed immediately that it was Madame Chevreuse, and he was correct. The man demanded to see a certain handkerchief which Aramis kept in a box near his bed, gave him three hundred pistoles, and left. Aramis was overjoyed, and D'Artagnan, who had followed him home, was also very pleased for him. Aramis decided that he would buy a good meal for the four comrades to enjoy together. They set off to find Porthos and were surprised to see Mousqueton walking in the street with D'Artagnan's old yellow horse! This was the horse that Madame Coquenard had promised him, and he was on his way to her house to return it. Porthos was very unhappy because it was not good enough for a musketeer to ride. Everybody would laugh at him. Mousqueton tied the horse to Madame Coquenard's front door, and Porthos went to see her. He told her what he thought about the animal she had given him. She apologized and replaced it with a better horse. She also gave him more money so that he could buy his equipment.

	That evening, D'Artagnan kept his promise to visit Milady. It was late at night, and it was very dark. Milady did not want any lights, for reasons that we shall see later, and because of this, she thought that D'Artagnan was the Count de Wardes. She held his hand and spoke very lovingly to him, and then gave him a valuable sapphire and diamond ring. She complained about the 'dreadful Gascon,' who had injured him at Calais, telling the Count that she would help him get revenge on him. All this time, she did not realize that it was really D'Artagnan whose hand she was holding, and in whose ear she was whispering. As D'Artagnan listened to all this, he realized that Milady would never love him. However, he agreed to meet her again the following week.

	The next morning, D'Artagnan visited Athos and told him what had happened. When he showed Athos the ring that Milady had given him, Athos examined it very closely and then turned so pale that D'Artagnan asked him whether he was suddenly sick.

	"It's exactly like a ring that used to belong to my family," said Athos. "I gave it away in an hour of perfect happiness, but now it brings me bitter memories."

	He begged D'Artagnan not to visit this dangerous woman again, and D'Artagnan agreed. However, when he arrived at his own room, Kitty was waiting for him with another message for the Count de Wardes, inviting him to come again that evening. D'Artagnan wrote a reply, telling her that he was very busy, and she would have to wait her turn. He signed it 'Count de Wardes' and gave it to Kitty to deliver to Milady. When Milady read the note, she was furious, and then she suddenly said, "Oh no! Could he have seen-?"

	D'Artagnan did not visit Milady for several days after that, and then she wrote him a letter inviting him to come and see her. He decided to accept the invitation. When he arrived, Milady spoke very kindly to him, and he told her that he loved her. She said she might love him, too, if he would fight the Count de Wardes for her and kill him in a duel. D'Artagnan raised some objections to this, but she accused him of being a coward, and at last, he had to agree.

	"Do you love me?" he asked.

	"Yes, yes, of course."

	"Then I must confess something to you."

	"Confess something?"

	Then he told her that the Count de Wardes had not received any letters from her and that the Count had never visited her because D'Artagnan had taken the letters, written the replies, and pretended to be him when she gave him the ring.

	Milady, of course, was furious. She rushed away from him, but her dress was caught on a chair and came away from her shoulders. D'Artagnan saw the brand on her shoulder, and suddenly realized who she was. She was Athos's wife! That was why she had that ring. Obviously she was not as dead as Athos thought she was when he hanged her. That also explained why she wanted to meet in the dark. She did not want anybody to see her branded shoulder. D'Artagnan groaned in his amazement, but he did not have long to think about his terrible discovery.

	Milady was no longer an angry woman - she was a wounded animal. "You know my secret," she screamed, "and you must die!"

	She seized a small knife from her dressing table and ran toward him.

	Although D'Artagnan was brave, Milady's pale face and wide eyes frightened him. He moved back, as if he were attacked by a deadly snake. Milady was determined to stab him and charged after D'Artagnan.

	He stopped her by pointing his sword at her, and she might have killed herself by pushing against it, but he backed away and then escaped into Kitty's room, locking the door between the two rooms. Milady pounded against the door and stabbed it with her knife, screaming and shouting like a mad spirit. Then she rang the bell to get the servants to stop D'Artagnan from escaping. However, they were not quick enough. Kitty helped him to get out through one of the back doors in the house, and he ran down the street with Milady shaking her fist at him from an upstairs window. When he had disappeared from sight, Milady turned back into the room and fainted.

	D'Artagnan ran through the streets of Paris without thinking very much about where he was going. Eventually, he returned to Athos's house and told him what had happened. Athos agreed that Milady was his wife and warned D'Artagnan to stay away from her. They decided to sell the ring she had given D'Artagnan, and this would enable them to buy the equipment they needed for the campaign. When D'Artagnan finally went home, he found Kitty waiting for him. She was very frightened of Milady and begged D'Artagnan to help her escape from Paris. Aramis said he knew a lady in the country who wanted a maid, and it was arranged that Kitty would go there.

	"I will always love you as much as I love you today," D'Artagnan told her as she left.

	"Hmmm," said Athos.

	When Kitty had gone, Athos and D'Artagnan set off to buy their equipment. They found some good horses for themselves and their servants and bought all the necessary equipment for the campaign.



	Chapter sixteen

	Two Appointments for D'Artagnan

	The four comrades were happy now that they had their equipment, and they enjoyed a wonderful dinner together. The dinner was interrupted, however, by Planchet, who had two letters for D'Artagnan. One of them was from Constance Bonacieux, and it told him to be on the Chaillot road between six and eight o'clock that evening. She said that she would be going past there in a carriage at that time, and she would love to catch a glimpse of him.

	"If you see me, pretend that you don't recognize me. It's too dangerous for you as well as for me."

	D'Artagnan was overjoyed to know that she was still alive, but Athos thought it was a trap and that he should not go. In the end, the musketeers decided they would all go to make sure that D'Artagnan would be safe.

	The other letter that Planchet brought was from the Cardinal, commanding D'Artagnan to come to his office at eight o'clock that evening. D'Artagnan thought that he could keep both appointments, but this time, it was Aramis who thought that he ought not to keep the second appointment. D'Artagnan, however, was determined to go. Athos arranged that there would be a group of musketeers at each of the gates of the palace. Their job was to rescue D'Artagnan if he was being taken out of the Cardinal's office as a prisoner.

	The three musketeers and D'Artagnan rode out to the Chaillot road, showing off their fine new horses and equipment. On the way, they met Monsieur de Treville, and D'Artagnan told him about his invitation to see the Cardinal. Monsieur de Treville agreed with his decision to go and see him and promised that if he did not report the following morning, he would find and rescue him, wherever he was.

	D'Artagnan waited by the Chaillot road, with the three musketeers a little distance behind him. He saw a carriage approaching very quickly and felt sure that it would contain the person he wanted to see. It did. He saw Constance Bonacieux for the briefest of moments, and she saw him, too. He shouted with happiness and galloped after the carriage, forgetting what the letter had told him. He caught up to the carriage, but the blind had been drawn, and he could no longer see inside it. Suddenly, he remembered the warning in the letter. He stopped his horse and stood still for a few moments. Then he returned to the musketeers and told them what he had seen.

	The clock struck half past seven, and D'Artagnan had to hurry away to keep his appointment with the Cardinal. Athos, Aramis, and Porthos each took three musketeers with them and stood at one of the three gates leading to the Cardinal's office. D'Artagnan was worried about the visit because he did not know why the Cardinal wanted to see him, and he could think of a number of reasons for the Cardinal to be angry with him. However, he entered the office bravely and waited. Some of the Cardinal's guards were in the waiting room, and they recognized him as the man who had injured Jussac, the leader of the guards, in the fight near the convent. They stared at him, but D'Artagnan showed that he was not afraid of them by returning their stare. He wondered how long the Cardinal would make him wait, but he was taken into the office almost immediately.

	The Cardinal asked him several questions about his family and his adventures since leaving home. It seemed to D'Artagnan that the Cardinal knew a lot about him. He even knew about his trip to England and the reason for it.

	"Why didn't you come to see me when I invited you?" asked the Cardinal.

	"I thought Your Eminence was not pleased with me."

	"On the contrary, I was very pleased with you and wanted to offer you a position. Please sit down, and we can talk about it now."

	D'Artagnan was amazed. He was even more amazed when the Cardinal offered him a good position in his guards and an even better one after the campaign. He was very embarrassed and told the Cardinal that he could not take up this offer because he was loyal to his friends in the musketeers, and they would think badly of him if he accepted it.

	"To be honest, Sir," he added, "I don't think that I am good enough for the offer that you have given me."

	The Cardinal was not happy but had to accept D'Artagnan's decision. When D'Artagnan left the office and found his comrades, he told them what had happened, and they agreed that he had done the right thing.

	The next day, the guards, including D'Artagnan, left for La Rochelle. The musketeers did not go yet because their job was to guard the King, and he was not feeling well. He had postponed his departure for a day, so the musketeers had to wait.

	As the guards left Paris, D'Artagnan was looking at the Bastille and did not notice Milady sitting on a horse and watching him. Milady pointed him out to two rough looking men. The men came close to take notice of him. Milady left, after she was certain that the men would follow her orders. The men soon followed the company out of the city.



	Chapter seventeen

	Milady's First Attempts at Revenge

	The siege of La Rochelle was an important historical event. The King's father, Henry IV, had allowed the Protestants to live at La Rochelle, but since then, it had become a place where everybody who disagreed with the King or the Cardinal went to live. The Cardinal's enemies, especially the Duke of Buckingham, supported the people of La Rochelle and used them to spy on the King and the Cardinal. The Cardinal decided to besiege La Rochelle, drive the population out, and restore the city to the Catholic Empire. The King's brother, whom everybody called Monsieur, was in charge of the siege at first.

	When the King had recovered, he travelled from Paris toward La Rochelle but became sick at Villeroy and stopped there. The musketeers stopped there with him so that D'Artagnan and his three comrades were separated for longer than they had anticipated.

	One evening, he was walking along a lonely path near the guards' camp when two men hiding behind a hedge began to shoot at him. He ran back toward the camp as the bullets whistled around his ears. None of them hit him, although one did put a hole in his hat. When he got back to the camp, he looked at the hole in his hat and saw that it had not been made by an army bullet. So who had shot at him? Was this the work of the Cardinal? He thought this unlikely, as the Cardinal had much surer ways of dealing with his enemies. He thought it was much more likely that Milady was trying to take revenge on him.

	A few days later, D'Artagnan's commanding officer called him to his tent and asked him to volunteer for a difficult and dangerous job. He needed a small group of men to go to a building which the Rochellese had captured from the army that night. The commander wanted to know how many men were in this building. D'Artagnan asked for four volunteers to go with him. Two men from the guards volunteered and so did two soldiers from another company. D'Artagnan accepted them and set out toward the building, going along a trench to stay out of sight. The guardsmen marched beside him, and the soldiers marched behind them. After a while, he turned around and saw that the soldiers had disappeared.

	Thinking that they must have become frightened and run away, he continued with the two guardsmen. They were now about forty yards from the building and stopped. The building seemed to be deserted, and they were just about to go further toward it when some puffs of smoke appeared from one of the windows and bullets whistled around the heads of the three men. They had found out that the building was still occupied, so they decided to turn around and head back toward the camp. As they leapt into the trench, a single shot rang out, and one of the guardsmen fell down with a bullet through his chest. The other guardsman continued to run, but D'Artagnan picked up the guardsman who had been shot and tried to help him back to the camp. However, two more shots rang out and the guardsman was hit in the head. The other bullet just missed D'Artagnan. He looked around, suddenly realizing that these bullets could not come from the enemy building because they were sheltered by the angle of the trench.

	D'Artagnan suddenly remembered the two soldiers who he thought had run away and then thought of the two men who had tried to shoot him a few days earlier. He had an idea. He fell down over the body of the guardsman and pretended to be dead. A moment later, he saw two heads appear over the edge of the trench. He was right. They were the two soldiers who had run away. He realized that they had volunteered only so that they could shoot him, and his death would look as if it was caused by the enemy. Luckily, D'Artagnan's trick worked. The soldiers thought he was dead and approached him without bothering to reload their guns. When they were close to him, D'Artagnan suddenly sprang up and attacked them with his sword.

	One of them ran toward the enemy and was shot in the shoulder, and the other fought against D'Artagnan. It did not take D'Artagnan long to disarm him and put his sword against his throat. The soldier confessed that he had been paid by a woman called Milady and that the other soldier had a letter from her in his pocket. D'Artagnan told him to go and get the letter, but the soldier was very afraid.

	"Please don't make me go there. It's just another way of killing me."

	D'Artagnan, however, would not change his mind and eventually the soldier set out toward his fallen friend. As he went, he looked so afraid and miserable that D'Artagnan took pity on him.

	"Stop. You stay here, and I'll go. I'll show you the difference between a brave man and a coward."

	D'Artagnan reached the wounded soldier and decided to carry him back into the trench before looking for the letter. He picked him up just as the enemy began to fire at them. He felt the body of the soldier get hit and then threw him into the trench before jumping into it himself. The soldier was dead, but D'Artagnan soon found his wallet and the letter that he wanted. This is what it said:



	You let that woman escape, and now she is safely in a convent. Do not fail with the man, or you will be punished.



	D'Artagnan put this letter from Milady in his pocket, and then began to question the second soldier. The two soldiers had been paid to kidnap a woman who was leaving Paris by the la Villette gate on a certain day, but they had stopped to have a drink and were too late for the carriage.

	"What were you going to do with the woman?"

	"We were going to take her to a house in the Place Royale."

	D'Artagnan understood that Milady had wanted to keep Madame Bonacieux in her own house. This made D'Artagnan realize what a powerful enemy Milady was, but he also realized that the Queen had found Madame Bonacieux and removed her safely to a convent. D'Artagnan was so happy that he turned to the soldier and helped him back to the camp. The first guardsman had already told the commanding officer that the other four men had been killed, so when D'Artagnan arrived with the soldier, he was given a hero's welcome. The soldier swore to serve him for the rest of his life.



	Chapter eighteen

	Milady and the Cardinal

	D'Artagnan had saved himself from Milady's attack. One of his enemies was dead, and the other was his devoted friend for life and had become Planchet's servant. However, Milady was not finished yet. The siege went on, and the King stayed in Villeroy with the musketeers. One day in November, D'Artagnan received a message from Villeroy. This is what it said:



	Your friends Athos, Porthos, and Aramis spent an evening at my hotel and enjoyed the wine. They thought of you and ordered me to send you twelve bottles of Anjou wine so that you can drink their health.



	It was signed by Godeau, innkeeper to the musketeers.

	D'Artagnan was very pleased that his comrades were thinking of him and decided to invite some of the guards to drink the wine with him. He organized a party for two days later. Planchet and his new servant, Brisemont, were appointed waiters. On the day of the party, Planchet got the wine from the storeroom where it had been stored, and Brisemont started opening the bottles.

	"Why don't you have a glass of wine, Brisemont?" said D'Artagnan. "It will help you recover from your wounds."

	The wine looked very cloudy, but they thought that this was just because it had travelled from Villeroy. The members of the party drank their soup and were just about to drink some of the wine when they heard gunfire. Thinking it was an attack, they rushed out ready to fight. They soon discovered that the real reason for the gunfire was that the King had arrived, and everybody was celebrating. The men lined up to welcome the King, and then they saw the three musketeers. D'Artagnan was very pleased to see them and called out to them, inviting them to come and enjoy some of the wine they had sent from Villeroy.

	"Bottles of wine that we sent?" asked Athos. "We never sent you any wine!"

	"The twelve bottles of Anjou wine," explained D'Artagnan.

	D'Artagnan showed them the letter from Godeau.

	"That's not his writing," said Athos. "Don't drink the wine!"

	They ran back to the dining room where the party was to be held. The first thing they saw was Brisemont lying on the ground, twisted with pain.

	"This is a nice trick you've played on me, D'Artagnan," he said. "You save my life and pretend to be my friend, and then you poison me with Anjou wine!"

	D'Artagnan tried to explain, but the dying man would not listen.

	"I don't believe you!" he hissed. He coughed some blood, and a spasm went through his body. He was dead.

	D'Artagnan postponed the party and told Planchet to bury Brisemont. Then he and the musketeers went to an inn, where Athos told Porthos and Aramis the story of Milady. They all tried to think of ways in which they could defend themselves against Milady's attacks. Then D'Artagnan asked what they should do about Constance Bonacieux, who was in a convent somewhere.

	"We can rescue her after the Campaign," said Porthos, "but we will need to know which convent she is in. Perhaps Aramis can find out for us by writing to his friend."

	Aramis was slightly embarrassed by this but agreed to write a letter and see what he could find out.

	The King was eager to start fighting against Buckingham and the people in La Rochelle. He began by attacking an island near the port and defeating the Englishmen there. The Englishmen got on their ships and sailed away, leaving more than two thousand dead and wounded soldiers. They also left behind some papers that revealed a secret plot between a league of nations, which included the German Empire, Spain and England, against France. Madame de Chevreuse and the Queen were part of this plot, so the Cardinal was on his guard and constantly watching for spies and secret messengers.

	One night, the three musketeers were riding back to the camp from an inn called the Red Dovecote when they heard horses coming toward them.

	"Who goes there?" they called.

	"Who are you?" was the answer.

	They soon discovered that the other riders were the Cardinal and some of his guards. The Cardinal told them to come with him because he did not want anyone in the camp to know that he was absent. Athos told him that they had been in a fight at the Red Dovecote about a woman who had arrived there, although they had not seen her. The Cardinal told them they were right to defend the woman, and they all rode back to the Red Dovecote together.

	The Cardinal made them wait in a large room and went upstairs to another room himself. The musketeers realized that they had prevented somebody from kidnapping an important lady and wondered who it was. As Athos walked up and down the room, he passed a chimney and heard voices. He stopped to listen. It was the Cardinal speaking to none other than Milady! Athos turned white at the sound of her voice.

	The three musketeers gathered around the chimney and listened as the Cardinal told Milady what he wanted her to do.

	"You are to go to London again and tell the Duke of Buckingham that if he assists the people of La Rochelle, I shall tell everybody about the secret meeting he had with the Queen. Tell him that I have Montague, one of his agents, in prison and that I also have a letter from Madame de Chevreuse which proves that the Queen is plotting against the King of France. I am sure that he will give up his plans because he is in love with the Queen."

	"What will happen if he refuses to listen?" asked Milady.

	"The Puritans in England hate him, and it should not be difficult to find one who can be persuaded to murder him. When you have talked to the Duke of Buckingham, you should return to France and go to the convent at Bethune. Wait there for further orders."

	Milady agreed to do as the Cardinal commanded, but then she wanted some help against her own enemies.

	"Madame Bonacieux has been removed from prison by order of the King and taken to a convent, but I don't know which one. Can you find out where she is? She must die because she helped my enemies."

	The Cardinal agreed to find out and tell her.

	"I have another enemy, more dangerous than Madame Bonacieux, and that is D'Artagnan. He is also your enemy because he helped the Duke of Buckingham and the Queen in the affair of the diamonds."

	"He is a brave man," replied the Cardinal, "but I will gladly let you do what you like with him. I will write you an order giving you permission. There are two guards outside with a horse for you, and they will escort you safely to the ship for England. You must leave as soon as you can. You can deal with D'Artagnan later."

	Athos, Porthos, and Aramis heard all of this as they sat near the chimney. Athos told the others that he had to leave the inn immediately.

	"What will we tell the Cardinal when he finds that you have gone?" they asked.

	"Tell him that I have gone ahead to check the road because the innkeeper said something that made me think it was dangerous."

	He left the inn and rode off in the direction of the camp.



	Chapter nineteen

	Breakfast in the Bastion

	When the Cardinal came downstairs, he noticed that Athos was absent but believed the excuse that Porthos and Aramis gave him. He told the remaining two musketeers to get ready and come back to the camp with him.

	Athos, meanwhile, galloped a small distance down the road and then hid in the bushes until the Cardinal went past. He got back on his horse and galloped back to the inn. He told the innkeeper that he had a message for the lady and went up to her room. He walked in without knocking and confronted Milady. She was terrified.

	"Count de la Fere!" she exclaimed.

	"Yes, Count de la Fere. I've come to deal with an important matter. Sit down."

	She sat down, unable to speak, and he sat down opposite her.

	"You are a devil, an evil spirit sent to torture men. You are powerful and wealthy, but you will not always win, Anne de Breuil!"

	It had been a long time since Milady had heard anyone use her real name, and it frightened her. Athos then told her that he knew all about the story of the diamonds and that she was planning to murder the Duke of Buckingham, D'Artagnan, and Constance Bonacieux.

	"I don't care about the Duke of Buckingham," he said, "but D'Artagnan is my friend, and if you hurt him or his friend, Constance Bonacieux, it will be the last thing you ever do!"

	"He insulted me, and he must die! They must both die! She first, and then he!"

	Athos now became very angry. He took his gun from his belt and pointed it at her head.

	"Give me the permission that the Cardinal wrote for you," he said.

	She gave it to him, and he left. On the way out, he spoke to the two guards who were to escort her to the ship and reminded them to take the lady to the ship as soon as possible. Then he leapt onto his horse and took a short cut across the fields so that he could get ahead of the Cardinal. When the Cardinal saw him on the road ahead of him, he did not suspect that Athos had been back to the Red Dovecote and spoken to Milady.

	Milady thought about catching up with the Cardinal and telling him what had happened, but she realized that Athos would be able to tell the Cardinal a lot of things that she did not want anybody to know. She went with the two guards and boarded the ship to England.

	Early the next morning, the musketeers sent a message to D'Artagnan, asking him to come and see them immediately. When he arrived, he told them that he had been involved in a battle the previous night when the army had captured a bastion previously held by the enemy. Athos suggested that they go somewhere else to talk because they did not want anybody to hear what they were saying. They went to the Parpaillot Inn, but it was not a good time to be there because a lot of soldiers were just about to eat breakfast. D'Artagnan told them about the battle for the bastion. Five of the guards had been killed, and about ten Rochellese had also lost their lives.

	Athos was annoyed because there were too many people there, and he could not speak to the others, especially to D'Artagnan, without people hearing him. Then he had a good idea.

	"Gentlemen, we will have a bet," he said to four of the men standing around them. "I bet that my three comrades and I will have breakfast in that bastion and defend it against the enemy for an hour at least while we eat. The losers will pay for a good meal for the winners."

	They all agreed to this because they loved to bet, and the four comrades packed their breakfast into a basket and set off for the bastion. A large crowd gathered to watch them go. When they were certain that nobody could hear them, Athos explained to D'Artagnan that they needed a place where nobody would suspect them of talking or plotting together because they had some very important matters to discuss. By the time they reached the bastion, over three hundred men were watching from the camp, and they all cheered as the four men went into the building.

	They found about a dozen dead men inside the bastion, and they took their guns. D'Artagnan and Porthos wanted to throw the dead men over the wall and into the trench, but Athos said they might be useful later and to leave them where they were. They loaded the guns and then sat down to eat their breakfast. Athos began to tell D'Artagnan what he and the other musketeers had heard at the Red Dovecote, and D'Artagnan began to feel ill.

	"I will be killed," he said. "I have too many enemies - the stranger from Meung, the Count de Wardes, Milady, and the Cardinal!"

	"That's only four," said Athos, "and there are four of us, so you don't need to worry."

	At this stage of their discussion, they were interrupted by the approach of the enemy. There were four soldiers and sixteen workers, as well as a sergeant. Athos leapt onto a wall and called out to the enemy.

	"We are busy having breakfast and don't want to be disturbed," he shouted.

	"Are you mad?" said D'Artagnan.

	Athos took no notice but continued to shout at the enemy. "Please wait until we have finished our breakfast, or come and join us and drink a toast to the King!"

	The enemy fired at Athos but did not hit him. The musketeers fired back and killed three of the soldiers and wounded one of the workers. They fired again with other guns and killed the sergeant and two workers. The rest of the group fled, and the musketeers reloaded their guns before resuming their discussion.

	Athos told D'Artagnan that the Cardinal wanted Milady to go to England and make sure that the Duke of Buckingham was killed and that he had given her written permission to do whatever she wanted with D'Artagnan and Constance Bonacieux. He told them how he had taken the document from Milady and showed it to D'Artagnan.

	"What do you think she will do now?" asked D'Artagnan.

	"I suppose she will return from England and tell the Cardinal about me," said Athos, "and he will have us all locked up in the Bastille."

	"I think it would be less of a crime to kill Milady than it is to kill these poor people in La Rochelle," declared Porthos. "Their only crime is that they are not Catholics, but she is on her way to murder the Duke of Buckingham! That is a far greater crime."

	The others agreed with him but had to put their discussion on hold again because about twenty-five enemy soldiers were approaching the bastion.

	"Perhaps we should head back to the camp," said Porthos.

	"Impossible!" explained Athos. "I have not finished my breakfast, we have not finished our discussion, and we still have ten minutes to go before we win our bet!"

	The four comrades began to fire at the enemy as soon as they were within range and killed quite a few of them, but the enemy kept advancing. Athos had found a weak part of the wall in the bastion, and as the enemy soldiers reached this weakened part, the four friends pushed against it, and it collapsed on top of the enemy. A couple of them survived this attack, but they ran away, so the musketeers continued their discussion.

	D'Artagnan suggested that he go back to England and warn the Duke of Buckingham about Milady and her plan, but Athos dismissed this idea because the Duke of Buckingham was an enemy of France and helping him at this time would be treason. They decided that they should write a letter to the Queen and another to Lord de Winter, Milady's brother-in-law, who had returned to London. As they were discussing this, they heard drums and noticed that a much larger group of the enemy was approaching.

	Athos told the others to help him tie the dead men against the walls and put guns and swords in their hands. Then they left the bastion and went back to the camp. Athos waved a flag at the enemy, and they shot some holes in it, but they could not hit Athos. Then the enemy began to fire at the dead bodies that the musketeers had tied to the wall, and the four friends easily escaped to the camp. As they walked along the trench, they decided that D'Artagnan should sell the ring he received from the Queen to raise the money they needed to send messengers to Paris and England. Everybody at the camp cheered when they returned, and news of their action soon reached the Cardinal.

	"I must have them on my side," he said to himself and told Monsieur de Treville to make D'Artagnan a musketeer immediately. D'Artagnan was very pleased with his promotion because at last, he had achieved his ambition.



	Chapter twenty

	Milady Goes to London

	D'Artagnan was now a musketeer, and he spent the rest of the day proudly marching up and down in his new uniform. The musketeers had a wonderful lunch with Monsieur de Treville and then sat down to write the letters to Lord de Winter and to the Queen. It took the four of them quite some time to work out exactly what to write. They had to be careful in case the letters were intercepted by the Cardinal's spies.

	Eventually, it was Aramis who wrote the letters. The letter to Lord de Winter warned him about a dangerous relation whose marriage to his brother had been illegal and who was trying to kill him so that she could inherit the family wealth. The letter to the Queen warned her that the Duke of Buckingham was in danger by telling her that Aramis had had a dream about his death. When he read these letters to his friends, they all declared themselves satisfied. They could not send the letter directly to the Queen but knew that they could write to Aramis's friend Madame de Chevreuse in Tours. She would pass on the message to the Queen.

	D'Artagnan had sold his diamond ring, so they had plenty of money. They gave some of it to Planchet for his trip to England and some of it to Bazin for his trip to Tours. They told Planchet to go to London and give the letter to Lord de Winter and then return to them at La Rochelle. They thought it would take about two weeks to make this trip, and they promised him some more money if he could return within that time. Before Planchet left, D'Artagnan secretly told him to give Lord de Winter another message.

	"Warn the Duke of Buckingham that there is a plot to kill him."

	The next day, they gave Bazin his letter and sent him to Tours. They thought that this trip would take about one week and told him to return within that time. The four musketeers were anxious and worried while the two servants were away. It was difficult for these men of action to wait. A week later, Bazin returned with a message from Tours which thanked them for their letter.

	"We understand your dreams, but we are sure they will not come true."

	They had to wait another week for Planchet to return. By the end of the week, they were more than anxious and kept their eyes on the road by which they expected Planchet to arrive.

	"Don't worry," said Athos, "I am sure he will keep his promise and arrive today."

	It was a very long day, but fortunately Planchet arrived that evening, and the four musketeers were delighted to see him. He gave D'Artagnan a note from Lord de Winter, which simply said "Thank you, and don't worry."

	Planchet promised to tell them all about his adventures the next day, and they all slept well that night.

	Milady had wasted a lot of time on her voyage to England. The ship had only just left the port when she went to the Captain and asked him to go back. She decided that she should tell the Cardinal what had happened after all. However, the Captain would not obey her because he considered it dangerous to be sailing in these waters during the siege. When Milady continued to insist, he agreed to put her on shore further up the coast where it was safer. He sailed along the coast, but the winds were unfavorable, and it took nine days to reach one of the ports of Brittany. Milady calculated that it would take her three days to cross the land and get back to the Cardinal, which meant that she had been away for almost two weeks. She decided that the Cardinal would be angry with her for wasting so much time and told the Captain that he could now take her directly to London. The Captain was annoyed at having lost nine days but was happy enough not to lose any more, so he set sail for the coast of England.

	Because of these delays, she did not arrive in Portsmouth until the day that Planchet was leaving it to return to France, having delivered the musketeers' message to Lord de Winter. Milady looked at all the other ships in the harbor. Many of them were warships ready to sail to France, and Milady was excited to think that it was her job to stop them by killing their commander, the Duke of Buckingham. As she stood there, a naval officer came aboard to inspect the passengers. When he saw Milady, he asked her to accompany him on his boat and took her and her baggage to shore.

	When they reached the shore, the young naval officer put her into a carriage and then got in beside her. The carriage drove off quite quickly, and Milady became worried.

	"Why am I being abducted?" she asked.

	The young naval officer said nothing and remained silent even when Milady asked him again and began to scream for help. She tried to open the door of the carriage and throw herself out, but the carriage was moving too quickly, so she sat still and stared at the silent young naval officer.

	After an hour, the carriage came to an iron gate and then to a stone castle on a cliff overlooking the sea. Milady could hear the sound of the sea beating against the rocky shore. The naval officer led her down a wide passage in the castle and let her into a large room.

	"This is to be your room," he told her.

	Milady looked around and saw that it was a well-furnished room, although it had bars on the windows and locks on the outside of the door. It was definitely intended to be a prison cell for her. Three sailors came in, carrying her baggage, and she again questioned the young officer.

	"Why am I being kept here?"

	"Please don't question me, Lady de Winter," he replied. "My orders were to bring you here, and I have done that without causing you too much discomfort, I think. I will now hand you over to another person."

	At that moment, a man came into the room, and Milady was surprised to see that it was Lord de Winter. She turned to him and asked him why he had brought her to the castle.

	"Am I your guest or your prisoner?"

	"You are in my home, so you can call it whatever you like. I think we should sit down and talk."

	He turned to the young naval officer. "Thank you, Mr. Felton. You may leave us."

	Milady was thinking furiously, trying to discover a reason for this unexpected imprisonment by her brother-in-law. She thought that it must be an act of revenge for something she had done in the past and decided to be friendly to her brother-in-law to try and find out what it was. The best way to defend herself, she thought, was to attack, but politely.

	"How did you know I was coming to England and when I would be arriving?"

	Lord de Winter, however, had some questions of his own.

	"I would like to know why you came to England at all," he said.

	"I came to see you."

	Lord de Winter was not deceived by this answer.

	"You are a very loving sister-in-law!"

	"Well, I am your nearest relative."

	"And my sole heir," added Lord de Winter. He looked at her and did not continue until he saw that she understood what he meant. Then he told her that he knew about her first husband and that he was still alive so that her marriage to Lord de Winter's brother was illegal. He also knew about the brand on her shoulder.

	Milady was furious. She leapt out of her chair and rushed at him, ready to tear him to pieces with her bare hands. He held her off with his sword and told her what he intended to do.

	"You will never inherit any money from me. In about two weeks, I am going on a ship to La Rochelle, and I will take you to Portsmouth with me. There, I will put you on a ship, and you will be banished to a foreign country. A man will go with you, and his only duty will be to shoot you if you try to escape or return to England. Until then, you will stay in this room, and you will discover that it is useless to try and escape."

	He called Felton back and told him to watch this young and beautiful but very dangerous woman carefully.

	"It is very important that she does not escape," he said.

	Back in La Rochelle, the Cardinal was worried because he was expecting news from England but did not receive any. As the days went by, his worry grew stronger. The siege of La Rochelle was going well. The population of the city was slowly starving to death. The authorities there had already put down a number of rebellions and executed their leaders. Messengers were being sent to the Duke of Buckingham almost every day, asking him to send assistance, but the messengers were all caught by the French musketeers and guards and were killed.

	The Cardinal waited. Where was Milady? Why had she not sent him a message? Just as the Cardinal thought the Rochellese were about to surrender, a messenger got through to them and told them that the Duke of Buckingham had a fleet of ships that were about to sail to France to save them and that Austria and Spain were also ready to fight against France. The citizens of La Rochelle decided not to surrender but to wait for their allies to save them.



	Chapter twenty one

	Milady and Mr. Felton

	Aramis received a letter from his friend in Tours, telling him that Constance Bonacieux was being kept safely at the convent in Bethune. D'Artagnan was delighted to hear this news, but he was worried because the musketeers had heard the Cardinal tell Milady to go to that very same convent when she had finished her work in England. As the four comrades were reading the letter near the beach, the Cardinal rode by and saw them. He stopped and asked them about the letter. Athos very bravely told the Cardinal that it was a letter from a woman and that he did not want to speak about it. When the Cardinal insisted, Athos continued to refuse. The other musketeers could not believe that Athos was defying the Cardinal. The Cardinal looked angry and almost had the musketeers imprisoned for their rude behavior, but in the end, he decided to let them go. As soon as he had left them, the musketeers decided to destroy the letter and made Athos's servant, Grimaud, eat it. The Cardinal would never find it now! The Cardinal, meanwhile, rode on, talking to himself.

	"Those are brave men, and I must have them on my side!"

	In Lord de Winter's house, Milady sat on a chair and realized that she did not know what to do. For the first time in her life, she was really frightened. She couldn't stop thinking about D'Artagnan. She wanted him dead because he had tricked her and discovered her secret. She was sure that he had somehow written a letter to Lord de Winter and was therefore responsible for her imprisonment in his castle. She hated him. She hated Madame Bonacieux, and she hated the Duke of Buckingham.

	She had to escape, and she had to do it soon because Lord de Winter had said that he would send her to Australia in about two weeks. With hatred and revenge in her heart, she sat down and began to think about how she might escape, kill the Duke of Buckingham, and take her revenge on Madame Bonacieux and D'Artagnan. She wondered what weapons she could use to attempt an escape, but it was not until she looked in the mirror and saw her own face that she regained confidence in her best weapon - her beauty!

	That evening, she waited for the guards to bring her some food. When she heard them approaching the room, she threw herself onto a chair and pretended that she had fainted. Felton and one of the guards came into the room and put the food on the tablebefore noticing that she was ill. Felton didn't know what to do and told the guard to tell Lord de Winter that his prisoner was ill. He sat down and waited while the guard was away. As soon as Milady realized that she was alone with Felton, she moaned. He turned to look at her and told her that he was pleased she was awake and would now leave her to eat her supper.

	Milady groaned again and softly said "Oh, where am I? Have I been ill?"

	Felton ignored her questions but told her that she would have three meals a day delivered to her room and that she could have a woman from the village for company if she chose. Then Lord de Winter arrived and guessed immediately that Milady had been pretending to be ill. He laughed at her and warned Felton not to be deceived by her tricks or by her beauty. Felton assured his master that he would not allow a woman to lead him astray. Lord de Winter led Felton out of the room, laughing cheerfully and wondering what Milady's next trick would be.

	Milady was furious and hissed at them like a snake. She was determined to find a way of escape.

	The next morning, the woman from the village came to visit her, and Milady told her that she was sick. The woman asked whether she should call a doctor, but Milady said that this would be of no use because the gentlemen did not believe that she was ill. Felton came into the room, and Milady began to cry and told him that she did not care whether or not they called a doctor. Felton looked undecided for a moment and then turned and left the room. Milady was pleased because she thought that she had made him feel some pity for her for a moment.

	A few hours later, Felton returned with a religious book that he said Lord de Winter wanted her to have because he was a Catholic like herself. The way in which he said this made Milady realize that Felton was not a Catholic but a Puritan like the people of La Rochelle, and from that moment, she pretended to be a Puritan, too. She could see that this surprised and impressed Felton. She began to accuse Lord de Winter of persecuting her because of her religion. She had learned some Puritan prayers and hymns from one of her servants in Paris, and now she began to pray and sing whenever she knew Felton was near the room. She sang beautifully. One of the guards told her to stop, but she heard Felton tell him that he was not to stop her from singing. Milady was triumphant because at last, she was beginning to have an effect on Felton.

	During the next few days, Milady continued to pray and sing and draw Felton into her trap. He began to believe that his master was cruel, and when Milady told him that she was planning to kill herself, he finally agreed to listen to the story of her life. Milady had to work fast because Lord de Winter had returned to her room and told her that the order for her to be deported to a foreign country had been written and only needed the Duke of Buckingham's signature. It would be signed in a few days, and he would send her away.

	Felton told Milady that no true Christian could take his or her own life, but he agreed to bring her a knife. When he returned with the knife, she looked at it and gave it back to him. Then she told him that the Duke of Buckingham had tried to make her change her religion, but when she refused, he drugged her wine and imprisoned her.

	Felton was outraged. "Did he-?"

	"Yes, I am sure that he did," replied Milady. "He kept me imprisoned for several days, and every night he-!"

	She put her hand over her mouth and remained silent for a few moments, while Felton urged her to continue. She told her story so well that Felton became more and more furious. She watched him carefully as she continued to tell him about the Duke of Buckingham's terrible behavior.

	"Eventually, he promised to let me go if I promised never to tell anyone what he had done to me. I told him that no Puritan could make such a promise and that I would tell everybody. He said that if I would not promise, he would have me branded like a common thief and that nobody would believe my story. The next day, he came back and carried out his threat. Look, Felton! See what he did!"

	She revealed the brand mark on her shoulder, and Felton groaned. He was completely fooled by her lies. He hated the Duke of Buckingham more than he had ever hated anyone or anything in the world.

	"You are so young and beautiful, and he did this to you!" he exclaimed. "He is an evil monster!"

	He covered her hand in kisses, and she smiled. She knew that she had won. She continued her lies and told him that the Duke of Buckingham was responsible for the death of her husband, Lord de Winter's brother, and that Lord de Winter was only doing what the Duke of Buckingham wanted him to do because the Duke did not want to see her again.

	"They are going to deport me in a few days' time, and I will never be able to return to England," she said and began to cry. "Let me die!" she cried.

	"No," he said. "You must live in honor, and you must be avenged."

	She seized the knife and stabbed herself, making sure that the knife did not enter her body too deeply. Her dress tore, she began to bleed, and she fell to the floor.

	Lord de Winter came in and saw her on the floor, but he knew that it was a trick and ordered Felton to leave the room.

	Felton hid the knife under his coat as he left.



	Chapter twenty two

	Assassination!

	The next morning, Milady waited for Felton to come to her room, but her breakfast was brought by different guards. Felton was not with them, and they told her that he had left the castle an hour earlier. Milady thought that she had failed. She thought that Felton must have told his master her story about the Duke of Buckingham and that Lord de Winter had sent him away. She was alone in the room until evening, when Lord de Winter came to talk to her.

	"You were beginning to affect poor Felton," he told her, "but I have forbidden him to see you again. Tomorrow, you will leave this room, and I will put you on a ship. I have told the guards to shoot you if you speak to anyone, and the Captain will throw you into the sea if you speak to anyone without his permission."

	When he had gone, Milady looked at her ring, which contained a very strong poison. She began to wonder if she should use it on herself. Then she heard somebody tapping on the window and turned to see Felton looking in at her. He was sawing at the bars. It took him an hour to saw through them, and then he tapped again. Milady climbed out of the window, and Felton helped her to climb down the rope ladder which he had used to get up to her window. Milady was so frightened that she fainted, but Felton got her safely down and carried her to the beach and onto a small boat with four men in it. The four men rowed the boat to a ship, where Milady and Felton went aboard.

	"This ship will take you anywhere you want to go," he told her, "but you must take me to Portsmouth first. Lord de Winter ordered me to go there and have the Duke of Buckingham sign your deportation order. I have to hurry because he is leaving for La Rochelle tomorrow."

	The ship set sail at once. By seven o'clock the next morning, it was anchored in Portsmouth, and Felton went to see the Duke of Buckingham. The Captain agreed to wait until evening for him to return so that he could escape to France with Milady. He kissed Milady's hand before he was rowed to the shore in a small boat. When he stepped off the boat, he turned and waved to Milady again. Then he walked quickly into the city to find the Duke of Buckingham's home. As he walked along, he thought about all the terrible things that the Duke of Buckingham had done in England and about the way he had treated Milady. He grew more and more angry and touched the knife that was hidden under his coat.

	Even at this early hour of the morning, the streets of Portsmouth were very busy because all the soldiers were preparing to go onto the ships and sail to La Rochelle to fight against the French. Felton went straight to the Admiralty Office where the Duke of Buckingham would be. He told the guards that he had an urgent letter from Lord de Winter, and they let him though the gates. Another messenger arrived at the same time and also demanded to see the Duke of Buckingham. Felton was called first. A guard took him up some stairs and into a large reception hall. From there, he was taken into the Duke of Buckingham's private office and saw the Duke. He gave him the deportation order and began to talk to him about it. The Duke was surprised that a servant would dare to ask him so many questions. Felton grew bolder and began to accuse the Duke of many crimes against England and against Milady. The Duke was furious and was about to ring for his servants to take Felton away. Felton, however, stood between him and the bell and demanded that the Duke sign a document to release Milady. At that moment, a servant came into the room crying, "A letter from France!"

	Felton jumped at the Duke of Buckingham and drove the knife into his side. Then he ran out of the room and down the stairs. He did not run any further, however, because there he met Lord de Winter, who, seeing him with the knife in his hand and blood on his clothes, realized that he was too late to save the Duke of Buckingham.

	"What a fool I am!" he exclaimed. He seized Felton and handed him over to the guards, who took him away. Lord de Winter rushed into the Duke of Buckingham's private office, where he saw the Duke lying on a couch and trying to stop the flow of blood from his wound. The other messenger also came into the room, saying he had a message from Anne of Austria, Queen of France. The Duke of Buckingham insisted on hearing this message. The Queen said that she still loved him and that he should be careful because there was a plot to kill him. The Duke of Buckingham was pleased to hear the message, although it came too late. He smiled. Then he fell from the couch and died.

	Lord de Winter rushed out to Felton, crying, "What have you done, you fool? You've assassinated the Duke of Buckingham!"

	Felton began to tell him lies about the reason for the murder because he wanted to protect Milady. However, just at that moment, he looked out of the window and saw his ship sailing away. It had not waited for him! He realized that he had been tricked by Milady and did not resist when the guards dragged him away and put him in a cell.

	As soon as the King of England heard that the Duke of Buckingham was dead, he stopped all ships sailing out of Portsmouth, but it was too late to stop Milady. Her ship had already sailed. One other ship sailed, and we shall hear more about that later.

	Meanwhile, the King of France was growing bored at La Rochelle because nothing was happening. He decided to return to Paris for a while, and some of the musketeers went with him, including our four comrades, who were very pleased to be returning to Paris. They wanted to rescue Constance Bonacieux. Their last message from the Queen had told them that she was being kept safely in a convent at Bethune, but they had also heard the Cardinal tell Milady to go to that very same convent when she had done her work in England. Aramis had written to his friend again, and they now had an authority to remove Madame Bonacieux from the convent.

	When they all arrived in Paris, the King allowed Monsieur de Treville to give his musketeers six days' leave. D'Artagnan thought it would be very easy to rescue Madame Bonacieux on his own with Planchet and tried to convince his three companions to stay in Paris. However, they would not hear of it.

	"Milady might be there before you, and then we will all need to be there," they said, "because you cannot beat her on your own."

	The four musketeers left Paris as soon as they could and rode to Arras, where they stopped to drink a quick glass of wine. D'Artagnan saw a man ride away from the inn and recognized the man from Meung. He wanted to get back on his horse and pursue him, but his friends stopped him. Athos explained that their horses were tired, and they would never catch him. Moreover, he was going in the opposite direction, so they would only be creating an unnecessary delay on their trip to Bethune. D'Artagnan reluctantly agreed. Then he saw a piece of paper lying on the ground. Perhaps the stranger from Meung had dropped it, so he picked it up. It had just one word written on it- "Armentieres."

	None of them knew where Armentieres was, but Athos recognized Milady's handwriting. They got back onto their horses and galloped off in the direction of Bethune.



	Chapter twenty three

	Madame Bonacieux

	Milady was very pleased with herself because she had done everything the Cardinal wanted her to do without anyone suspecting that she was involved in the plot, and she had done it all while she was imprisoned by Lord de Winter.

	The ship carrying Milady arrived safely in France, and she immediately wrote a letter to the Cardinal.

	"Be assured that the Duke of Buckingham will not leave England. I am going to the convent at Bethune, as we agreed, and I will wait there to hear from you."

	She stayed at an inn that night and set out for Bethune early the next morning, arriving there at about eight o'clock. She went straight to the Mother Superior, who gave her a room and some breakfast.

	It did not take long for her to discover that Madame Bonacieux was in the convent with her, and she arranged to meet with her as soon as possible. Constance Bonacieux had never met Milady and was surprised to discover that she knew Monsieur de Treville and the four musketeers. She was worried that Milady might love D'Artagnan, but Milady laughed at this suggestion and told Constance that she did not need to worry.

	"D'Artagnan loves you," she said, "and has been searching for you after you were kidnapped. He is very anxious to find you. I am so pleased to meet you."

	Poor Constance Bonacieux was completely fooled by Milady's lies and hugged her.

	"I am so happy to meet somebody who knows him," she said. "I love him very much! I have been very unhappy, but to be unhappy about him is to be happy! But he is coming here tomorrow or perhaps even today."

	Milady could hardly believe her ears!

	"D'Artagnan? Today? How?"

	Constance trusted her so completely that she showed her a letter that she had received from Madame de Chevreuse, telling her that the musketeers were on their way to remove her from the convent. Milady was so surprised that she almost fainted.

	Then they heard a horse approaching the convent. Madame Bonacieux hoped it was D'Artagnan already and was very excited. She looked out of the window and saw that it was not him. She described the man to Milady, who recovered quickly from her faint and stood up. The Mother Superior came to the room and told Milady that a gentleman had come to see her. Constance left the room, and the visitor arrived. It was Count de Rochefort, the man from Meung, the Cardinal's private spy.

	The two friends of the Cardinal quickly exchanged their news, and Count de Rochefort was surprised and delighted to hear that Milady had found Madame Bonacieux and that she trusted Milady like a true friend. Milady also complained about the musketeers, telling Count de Rochefort about Athos's visit and how he took the note she had from the Cardinal.

	Milady told Count de Rochefort to go back to the Cardinal and tell him what she had discovered about the musketeers and about Madame Bonacieux. However, she did not want to stay at the convent because she would not be able to fight against all four of the musketeers. Count de Rochefort pointed out that if she left the convent, Madame Bonacieux would be taken away by the musketeers.

	"Don't worry about that," said Milady. "I will take care of her. Remember, she trusts me like a true friend. Come back to me when you have seen the Cardinal and tell me what he wants me to do next. Before you go, organize a carriage to take me awayfrom here. I will go to a small town called Armentieres. It's on the river, and I only have to cross the river to be out of the country. When you return, you will find me there."

	Count de Rochefort did not know where Armentieres was and was worried that he might forget the name, so Milady wrote it down on a piece of paper for him, and an hour later, he galloped out of Bethune. This was the piece of paper that D'Artagnan found at Arras. Milady went back to Constance Bonacieux and told her that Count de Rochefort had seen some of the Cardinal's guards dressed as musketeers coming toward the convent. He thought they were coming to take Madame Bonacieux back to Paris. Constance Bonacieux was very worried and asked what she should do. Milady convinced her to come with her in her carriage.

	"We won't go very far away," she said, "in case the musketeers do arrive. I will send the carriage driver back here to watch for their arrival. If they come, he will come and tell us. We can trust him."

	The carriage arrived soon after that, but Milady was not ready to leave yet. She and Constance were just having something to eat, and she thought it best that they finish their meal first. While they were eating, they heard horses arriving at the convent. Constance wondered whether these were the Cardinal's guards or the musketeers. Milady watched at the window. When she saw D'Artagnan, followed by his three companions and then the four servants, she cried out in anger.

	"It's the Cardinal's guards!" she told Madame Bonacieux. "Come with me. We can escape through the garden. The carriage driver knows where to pick us up."

	Madame Bonacieux, however, was so frightened that she fell to her knees. "I can't move," she cried. "Save yourself, and forget about me."

	A light of anger flashed in Milady's eyes. She went to the table and picked up a glass of wine. She took the stone from her ring and dropped a small tablet from under it into the wine. Then she held the wine to Madame Bonacieux's lips and told her to drink it.

	"It will make you feel better and give you strength," she said.

	Constance Bonacieux drank.

	Milady smiled. "This was not how I expected to get revenge," she told herself, "but it is better than nothing." Then she turned and fled from the room.

	Madame Bonacieux heard knocking on the gates of the convent. She felt ill and could not move. A few moments later, she heard D'Artagnan's voice shouting, "Where are you, Constance?"



	Chapter twenty four

	Punishment and Reward

	Constance Bonacieux was dying of the poison that Milady had put into her wine, but she did not know it. She called out to D'Artagnan, and he broke down the door. He and the other musketeers rushed in and found her lying on the floor. They put her on the bed. Constance told D'Artagnan what had happened and that her good friend had escaped. Athos asked her who had poured the wine for her.

	"Lady de Winter," said Constance. "She is my friend who has just escaped."

	All the musketeers cried out in horror. D'Artagnan picked her up, and she kissed him. He felt her breath on his cheek, but it was her last breath. Madame Bonacieux was dead. He put her on the bed and fell down beside her.

	At that moment, a man appeared in the doorway, and the musketeers turned to look at him. He said that he was looking for a particular woman, and that he thought that they might be looking for the same woman. They did not recognize him at first, so he introduced himself.

	"I am Lord de Winter," he said, "and I am looking for my sister-in-law, Lady de Winter."

	Athos shook his hand, welcomed him, and invited him to join them in their hunt.

	"I left Portsmouth just after she did," said Lord de Winter. "I didn't know where she was going, but I saw you galloping by and recognized D'Artagnan, so I decided to follow you. I think this dead girl tells me that Lady de Winter has been here recently."

	D'Artagnan had fainted beside his dead friend, but now he woke up and began to cry. Athos wanted to help him and said, "Be a man, D'Artagnan. Only women cry for the dead. Men take revenge!"

	D'Artagnan stopped crying, and a look of hatred came into his eyes. "I will give my life to have revenge on that woman," he said.

	Lord de Winter, the four musketeers, and their servants left the convent and walked their horses to the nearest town, where Athos said they should stay at the inn. The others did not agree and wanted to pursue Milady and find her. However, Athos told them not to worry. He reminded them about that piece of paper. "That is where she is," he said. Then he told all of them that he was her husband. D'Artagnan already knew this, but the other musketeers and Lord de Winter were shocked. They also understood that he was very sure of having revenge. Otherwise, he would never have told them this secret.

	Late that night, Athos called the four servants to him and gave them some instructions. Then he went to visit a man in the town. This man lived in a very dark house at the end of a dark road. Athos asked him to do something, and the man shook his head to say that he would not do it. Then Athos showed him a piece of paper. It was the note that the Cardinal had written and that Athos had taken from Milady at the Red Dovecote. The man then agreed to do what Athos asked, and Athos returned to the inn.

	The next morning, D'Artagnan was awake early and wanted to go to Armentieres immediately, but Athos told him to wait. First, there was the funeral for Constance Bonacieux, which the musketeers and Lord de Winter attended. It was a very sad funeral.

	During this time, however, Planchet had been busy. He had gone to Armentieres and discovered that a lady had arrived the previous evening and was staying at the only inn. The innkeeper told him that she intended to stay in the area for quite a while. After the funeral, he told the musketeers what he had discovered. They asked Athos what they should do next, and he told them to wait.

	It was eight o'clock that night before he told them to get their horses ready. They were ready in an instant, but still they had to wait.

	"I am waiting for somebody," said Athos, "but he is not here yet, so I will go and get him. Wait here."

	The others all looked at each other in surprise. Who could this person be? When Athos returned, he was accompanied by a man in a mask and a long red coat. Athos did not tell them who he was, and they did not ask him. By nine o'clock, the group of horsemen was riding out of the town toward Armentieres.

	It was a dark and stormy night. There was no moon, although flashes of lightning lit the road with bright light from time to time. Porthos tried to speak to the stranger, but he would not speak. Aramis and Lord de Winter tried, too, but nobody could make him speak. The storm got worse. There was thunder, and the wind became very strong. Shortly afterward, it began to rain heavily. D'Artagnan enjoyed the rain on his body. He felt that it was washing him.

	As they came close to Armentieres, a man stepped out of the bushes. It was Grimaud, and he told them that Milady had left the town and gone down another road to the river. She was about one mile away in a small cottage. They went along the road toward the river and arrived at a small village. Another man stepped onto the road. It was Mousqueton, and he showed them the cottage that Milady had entered.

	Athos went to a window where he could see a light. He climbed up and looked in over the curtain, and saw Milady sitting in a chair near the fire, with her face in her hands. One of the horses made a noise, and Milady looked up and saw his face. She cried out in terror. Athos pressed against the window until it broke, and then he leapt into the room. Milady jumped up and ran to the door, but when she opened it, she saw D'Artagnan standing there with a gun in his hand. She shrank back into the room. Athos told D'Artagnan to put his gun away.

	"This woman has to be tried, not murdered!" he said. "Come in, all of you!"

	The other musketeers, Lord de Winter, and the masked man all entered the small cottage.

	"What do you want?" screamed Milady.

	"We are going to try you for your crimes," said Athos, "and you can defend yourself and try to prove that you are innocent."

	Each of the men accused her of a crime. D'Artagnan accused her of poisoning Constance Bonacieux, and Porthos and Aramis said they witnessed it.

	Then Lord de Winter accused her of having murdered the Duke of Buckingham. All the others were shocked to hear that the Duke of Buckingham had been murdered. He said that she was also responsible for the death of Felton, who would be hanged for stabbing the Duke of Buckingham, and that she was probably responsible for the death of his brother, whom she had killed to get his inheritance.

	"However," he added, "I cannot prove this."

	Athos accused her of marrying him under false pretences, to get his money.

	Then the masked man came forward, took off his mask, and told his story. Even Athos was surprised. He said that he was the executioner of Lille. He had known this woman when she was a young girl living in a convent. She had become friends with a young priest. Together they had stolen some money from the convent and run away. They had been caught, but she managed to become friendly with the jailer's son and escaped. Her friend was found guilty and was branded.

	"It was my job to brand him," said the man, "and he was my own brother! I chased this woman and found her. I branded her with the same iron. When I returned home, my brother had escaped, and the law kept me in prison until he returned. He did not return for a long time. When he heard that I was in prison because of him, he gave himself up, and I was released. The next day, he killed himself."

	D'Artagnan and Lord de Winter demanded death as the punishment for this evil woman. Porthos and Aramis agreed, and Athos gave the judgment. The executioner took hold of her and walked her out of the house. They all walked toward the river, leaving the empty house with its broken window, its open door, and the light of the fire flickering on the walls.

	At the river, the executioner tied Milady's hands and feet.

	Athos approached her. "I forgive you for wrecking my life. Die in peace."

	Lord de Winter approached her. "I forgive you for murdering my brother, for murdering the Duke of Buckingham, causing the death of Felton, and trying to kill me. Die in peace."

	D'Artagnan approached her. "Forgive me for making you hate me. I wronged you when I pretended to be Count de Wardes. I forgive you for murdering Constance Bonacieux. Die in peace."

	The executioner put her in a small boat and rowed across the river. The others stayed and prayed on the river bank. When the boat reached the other side of the river, Milady tried to escape, but the executioner caught her easily and killed her with a sword. He put her body back into the boat and began to row back. He stopped in the middle of the river and threw the body into the water.

	The musketeers returned to Paris and reported to Monsieur de Treville.

	"Did you enjoy your leave?" he asked them.

	"Yes," said Athos, "we did."

	The King was about to return to La Rochelle, and the musketeers had to accompany him. On the way, D'Artagnan was sitting in an inn when a man approached him with his sword drawn. It was the man from Meung, Rochefort, who arrested D'Artagnan and took him to the Cardinal. The Cardinal told D'Artagnan that he had committed crimes against France by trying to help the Duke of Buckingham. D'Artagnan knew that this must be the result of a letter from Milady before she died.

	"These charges have been brought against me by a woman who is a branded thief, who married one man in France and another in England, who poisoned her second husband, and tried to poison me. The woman I mean is Lady de Winter."

	He told the Cardinal what had happened in the last few days, and the Cardinal was astonished. He told D'Artagnan that he would have to stand trial for murdering Lady de Winter, but D'Artagnan took out the written permission that Athos had taken from Milady. "I have a pardon in my pocket," he said.

	The Cardinal looked at the writing on the paper. He looked very serious. Then he looked up at D'Artagnan and saw his open, honest face and saw the tears on his cheeks. He realized how much this young man had suffered in the last month and thought about the potential he had as a soldier. He decided to offer D'Artagnan a lieutenant's position in the guards. D'Artagnan was so surprised that he fell to his knees in gratitude. Then the Cardinal called in Count de Rochefort and made him shake hands with D'Artagnan.

	D'Artagnan went back to his companions and told them what the Cardinal had done. They were all very pleased.

	A year after the Duke of Buckingham's death, the town of La Rochelle surrendered. D'Artagnan became a lieutenant in the Cardinal's guards. Porthos left the army and married Madame Coquenard, whose husband had died. Aramis became a monk. Athos stayed in the army a little longer, but then he took back his title of Count de Fere and went to live in the country. D'Artagnan fought three duels with Count de Rochefort and wounded him three times. Then they decided to become friends.





	- THE END -

	Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

	Come back to http://english-e-books.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





The Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Maid Marian, by Amy E. Blanchard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Little Maid Marian

Author: Amy E. Blanchard

Release Date: December 1, 2006 [EBook #19988]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE MAID MARIAN ***




Produced by Jacqueline Jeremy, Audrey Longhurst and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









_LITTLE MAID MARIAN_




[Illustration: "BE YE REMOVED INTO THE MIDST OF THE SEA"]




LITTLE MAID
MARIAN

BY
AMY E. BLANCHARD

_Author of "Little Sister Anne," "Mistress May," "Playmate
Polly," "Three Little Cousins," etc._


THE PENN PUBLISHING
COMPANY PHILADELPHIA




Copyright, 1908, by
GEORGE W. JACOBS AND COMPANY
_Published July, 1908_

_All rights reserved_
Printed in U. S. A.




_CONTENTS_


   I.  A MUSTARD SEED            9

  II.  THE SCHOOL-TEACHER       27

 III.  A NEW ROAD               47

  IV.  COMPANIONS               67

   V.  BLACKBERRIES             87

  VI.  THE WHITE APRON         105

 VII.  PATTY'S LETTER          125

VIII.  A TRIP TO TOWN          143

  IX.  A VISIT TO PATTY        161

   X.  RUNNING AWAY            179

  XI.  A LETTER'S REPLY        199

 XII.  THE CHRISTMAS TREE      217




_CHAPTER I_

_A Mustard Seed_


The cat and kitten were both eating supper and Marian was watching
them. Her own supper of bread and milk she had finished, and had
taken the remains of it to Tippy and Dippy. Marian did not care very
much for bread and milk, but the cat and kitten did, as was plainly
shown by the way they hunched themselves down in front of the tin
pan into which Marian had poured their supper.

In the next room Grandpa and Grandma Otway were sitting and little
bits of their talk came to Marian's ears once in a while when her
thoughts ceased to wander in other directions. "If only one could
have faith to believe implicitly," Grandma Otway said.

"If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, and should say to that
mountain, be ye removed," quoted Grandpa Otway.

Marian sighed. They talked that way very often, she remembered, and
she herself had grown to consider it quite as difficult as did her
grandmother, to exercise complete faith. She had made numberless
mighty efforts, and yet things did not come out as she supposed they
ought. She sat gravely watching the cat and kitten lap up the last
drop of milk and carefully clean the sides of the pan in a manner
quite inelegant for humans, but no doubt entirely a matter of
etiquette in cat society, and then when Tippy, having done her
duty by the pan, turned her attention to making Dippy tidy,
Marian walked slowly away.

The sun was setting behind the hills, and touching the tops of the
trees along their base; further away the mountains were very dark
against a yellow line of sky. Marian continued her way thoughtfully
toward the garden, turned off before she reached the gate and
climbed a ladder which leaned against the side of the old brick
wall. From the ladder one could reach a long limb of a scraggy apple
tree upon which hung early apples nearly ripe. Marian went up the
ladder very carefully, taking care not to catch her frock upon a
nail or a projecting twig as she crept along the stout limb to
settle herself in a crotch of the tree. From this spot she could see
the distant sea, pinky purple, and shimmering silver.

Marian did not gaze at this, however, but turned her face toward the
mountains. She clasped her hands tightly and repeated firmly: "Be ye
removed into the midst of the sea. Be ye removed into the midst of
the sea." Then she waited, but the mountain did not budge an inch,
though the child kept her eyes fixed upon it. Twice, three times,
she repeated the words, but the mountain remained immovable. "I knew
it; I just knew it," exclaimed the child when she had made her final
effort, "and now I want to know how large a mustard seed is.
To-morrow I'll go ask Mrs. Hunt."

It was to Mrs. Hunt that she took all such questions, for she
hesitated to talk of very personal things to her grandparents. They
would ask her such sharp questions, and sometimes would smile in a
superior way when they did not say: "Oh, that is not a subject to
discuss with children; run along and play with Tippy." She did not
always want to be playing with Tippy when such mighty problems were
uppermost. She had many times tested her faith with the mountain,
but had always come away humiliated by the thought that her faith
must be too weak.

Though she brought her test to bear upon the mountain there was
another thing she did not dare to experiment with, though she always
intended to do so when the mountain should answer her command to be
removed. To be sure it would not make much difference to her if the
mountain should remove into the sea; it probably looked quite as
well where it was, and Marian supposed that no one would care to
have its place changed, but it made a great and mighty difference to
her about this other thing. She had never breathed her ardent wish
to any one, not even to Mrs. Hunt, and now that this fresh test of
faith had failed she would have to gather up a new stock before she
could try again.

The purple and pink and gold were fading; the sea looked gray; the
distant mountain was hidden under a cloud when Marian climbed down
from her perch to answer her grandmother's call: "Marian, Marian,
where are you? Come in out of the night air; the dew is falling."
Dippy was chasing moths in the garden as Marian took her way toward
the house. She watched him leaping up as each soft-winged creature
flitted by. When he failed to catch his prize he opened his mouth in
a mute meow, and looked at Marian as if asking her to help him.

"You mustn't catch moths, Dippy," said Marian. "They might disagree
with you. I should think anyhow, that they would be very dry eating,
and besides it is wicked to destroy innocent little creatures. Come,
you must go in with me." But this was the time of day when Dippy
liked specially to prance and jump and skurry after dusky, shadowy,
flitting things, so before Marian could pounce upon him, he was off
and away like a streak and could not be found. Then Marian went in
obediently at her grandmother's second call to spend the rest of her
evening sitting soberly by, while her grandmother knitted and her
grandfather read his evening paper.

She had tidied up her room, fed the cat and kitten, and darned her
stockings the next morning before she was free to go to Mrs. Hunt's.
Grandpa would go for the mail, and there were no errands to do,
except to return a plate to Mrs. Parker. It had come with some
spicy cakes for grandma, and must be taken back promptly.

The garden did not attract her just then, for it looked much
less mysterious by daylight. There was a fine array of poppies,
larkspurs, phlox and snapdragons; the oleander in its green tub was
all a-bloom, and there were six newly opened buds on the rose-bush.
Dippy was fast asleep in the sunshine, as if he, too, realized that
the garden was not so alluring by morning light.

It seemed no time to exercise faith upon the mountain, for a haze
covered it, and one could not feel even the near presence of a thing
one could not see, so why attempt to address a command to it to be
removed; to all intents and purposes it was removed when it was out
of sight.

Marian thought all this over as she trotted down the village street
to Mrs. Hunt's. Hers was one of a line of long low white houses set
back among trees. A border gay with nasturtiums, sweet peas, and
marigolds flourished each side the front door, but Marian did not
pause there; she went around to the kitchen where she knew Mrs. Hunt
would be this time of day. There was a strong odor of spices,
vinegar and such like filling the air. "Mrs. Hunt is making
pickles," said Marian to herself; "that is why she was gathering
cucumbers the last time I was here. I would rather it were cookies
or doughnuts, but I suppose people can't make those every day."

True enough, Mrs. Hunt was briskly mixing spices, but she turned
with a smile to her little visitor. "Well, chickadee," she said,
"how goes it to-day?"

"Oh, very well," returned Marian vaguely. "Mrs. Hunt, how big is a
mustard seed?"

For answer Mrs. Hunt put her fingers down into a small wooden box,
withdrew them, opened Marian's rosy palm, and laid a pinch of seeds
upon it. "There you are," she said. "I wish I could get at all the
things I want to see as easy as that."

Marian gazed curiously at the little yellow seeds. "They're not very
big, are they?" she said.

"Not very."

"Then you wouldn't have to have much faith," Marian went on,
following out her thought.

Mrs. Hunt laughed. "Is that the text that's bothering you? What are
you, or who are you, trying to have faith in? Tippy? Has she fooled
you again by hiding another batch of kittens?"

"No, Mrs. Hunt," Marian shook her head "it isn't Tippy; she is all
right, and so is Dippy, but you know if you want a thing very much
and don't see anyway of getting it ever, till you are grown up and
won't care about it, why it makes you feel as if--as if"--she
lowered her voice to a whisper and looked intently at her listener,
"as if either you were very wicked or as if--that about the mustard
seed--as if"--she hesitated, then blurted out hurriedly, "as if it
weren't true."

"Why, Marian Otway, of course it must be true," declared Mrs. Hunt.

"Then I'm very wicked," returned Marian with conviction.

"Why, you poor innocent, of course you are not. We are all more or
less imperfect creatures, I suppose, but--well, all is, if I were
your grandma, I wouldn't let you bother your head about such things.
It is hard enough for the preachers to settle some things for us and
themselves, so how do you suppose a baby like you is going to get
the gist of it?"

"If you were my grandma what would you do?" asked Marian coming to
the point.

"I'd give you interesting story-books to read, and see that you had
healthy-minded playfellows. You ought to be going to school; you are
enough bigger than my Annie was when she first went." This was a
point upon which Mrs. Hunt felt very keenly. She thought Mr. and
Mrs. Otway had not the proper ideas about bringing up children and
that Marian was too much with older persons. "I would send her off
to school quick as a wink," she had more than once said to Mrs.
Otway, but her remark had been received with only a smile, and one
could not follow out an argument when another would not argue, so
kind Mrs. Hunt had been able only to air her opinions to Mrs.
Perkins and her other neighbors, and once in a while to let Marian
know how she felt about her.

She had lost a little girl about Marian's age and made a point of
being especially good to the old-fashioned child who lived in the
brick house at the end of the street. The other houses were all
white or gray or brown, built plainly, and were either shingled or
clap-boarded affairs so that the brick house was a thing apart and
its occupants were usually considered the aristocracy of the place.
The older men called Grandpa Otway, "Professor," and the younger
ones said, "Good-morning, doctor," when they met him.

At the college where he had taught for many years he was still
remembered as an absent-minded, gentle but decided person, strong in
his opinions, proud and reticent, good as gold, but finding it hard
to forgive the only son who left home and married against the wishes
of his parents. When baby Marian's mother died her father had
written home, asking that his motherless baby might be taken in and
reared in the American land which he still loved. So one day Marian
arrived in charge of a plain German couple, but her father had not
seen her since and he still lived in far off Berlin. Once a year he
wrote to his little daughter and she answered the letter through her
grandmother. The letter always came the first of the year and the
latest one had given an account of a German Christmas. It had
enclosed some money for Marian to provide trinkets for her own
tree the next year.

Yet, alas,--and here came the tragedy--Marian had never been
allowed to have a tree; her grandparents did not approve of such
things; the money must go to the missions in foreign lands, and when
the next missionary box was sent Marian's Christmas money was sent
with it in one form or another. Even if Grandpa and Grandma Otway
had known what rebellious tears Marian shed and how she told Tippy
that she hated the heathen, and that she didn't see why they
couldn't go barefoot in a country as hot as China, and why they
couldn't eat rice as well as she, and why missionaries had to have
all sorts of things she didn't have, even if her grandparents had
known that, they would have said that it showed a wrong spirit and
that a little girl bid fair to become a hardened sinner, so she
ought to be made to sacrifice her own pleasures to so good a cause.

That would have been the least of it, for there would also have been
a long lecture from both grandfather and grandmother with a longer
prayer following and there would probably have been an order that
Marian must go without butter for a week that she might be taught to
practice self-denial. So Marian had thought it wise to say nothing
but to accept with as good a grace as possible the bitter necessity
of giving up her Christmas tree.

With the mustard seeds folded in her hand she stood watching Mrs.
Hunt tie up her spices, but the seeds were forgotten when Mrs. Hunt
said: "What will you do with a teacher living in your house and you
not going to school, I'd like to know. Mr. Hunt says he rather
guesses you'll not stay at home, but Mrs. Perkins says like as not
your grandma will have her teach you out of hours and pay her board
that way. As long as she is the daughter of a friend your grandpa
would want to make it easy for her and they'll fix it up some way."

Marian could scarcely believe her ears. "Coming to our house? Who is
she? What is her name, Mrs. Hunt? When is she coming? Who told you?"

"Dear bless me, what a lot of questions. Take care and don't get
your sleeve in that vinegar; it'll take all the color out. I'll wipe
it up and then you can lean on the table all you want to. There.
Well, you see it was Mrs. Leach told me. It seems this Miss Robbins
is the daughter of one of the professors at the college where your
grandpa was for so many years. He was one of the younger men, Mr.
Robbins was, being a student under your grandpa when he first knew
him. Now he is one of the professors with a big family and none too
well off, so his girl is coming to teach our school and Mr. Robbins
asked your grandpa if he wouldn't let her board at his house. She's
the eldest, but she hasn't been away from home much because she's
had to look after her younger brothers and sisters since her mother
died. Professor Robbins feels sort of anxious about her; he is
afraid of the wicked wiles of a big city like Greenville."

"Why, Mrs. Hunt, it isn't a big city, is it?" said Marian
innocently.

"Ain't it?" laughed Mrs. Hunt. "At all events he didn't want her
cast loose on it, and so he wrote to your grandpa, appealingly, I
should say, for it's fixed up that she is to come to the brick house
when the fall term begins and that's not far off."

"Oh!" Marian slipped down from the wooden chair upon which she had
seated herself, "I'd better go home and ask about it," she remarked.
"I'd much rather have some one beside grandpa teach me; he uses
such terribly long words and talks so long about things I don't
understand. Sometimes I can't make out whether I'm very stupid or
whether the lessons are extra hard."

"I guess you're no more stupid than the usual run of children," said
Mrs. Hunt stirring her pickles, "and I guess you will learn as much
about Miss Robbins and her affairs from me as you will at home. But
there, go 'long if you want to. Come in to-morrow; I'll be baking
cookies," she called after the child.

Marian answered with a nod as she looked back. Between the door and
the steps she halted once to open her hand and look for the mustard
seeds, but in her interest in Mrs. Hunt's news she had let them fall
to the floor and but one clung to her moist fingers. She tasted it
and found it strong and biting. "It can't be the bigness," she
murmured; "it must mean the hotness and strongness." This view of
the matter gave her a better understanding, according to her own
ideas, and she was glad she had tasted the small seed. After all,
there were pleasant things opening up. What if she could not move
mountains, there would be fresh cookies to-morrow and out of
somewhere a beautiful young lady was advancing toward her, not
exactly a playfellow, maybe, but some one much younger than
Grandpa and Grandma Otway.




_CHAPTER II_

_The School-Teacher_


The brick house had not the cheerful air of Mrs. Hunt's
white-boarded, green-shuttered abode. It was set back a few
feet from the side-walk, but a brick wall on each side shut out
any glimpse of the flower garden, and the iron railing leading
up from the flight of steps gave the place an air unlike the
rest of the village houses. Upon the top step Dorothy Robbins
stood a few moments before she rang the bell. She cast an upward
glance at the windows first; the shutters were all bowed and
silence reigned everywhere. She wondered what was behind the
brick wall, and if the inmates of the house would look as
forbidding and inhospitable as the house itself. She knew
the Otways had a little granddaughter and half looked to see
the child hanging on the gate or skipping down the path as she
approached the house. The door-bell clanged solemnly and presently
a sedate, middle-aged woman came to the door.

"Is Mrs. Otway at home?" asked Miss Dorothy.

"No, ma'am, she ain't," was the reply given most ungraciously.
"She's to a missionary society or a temperance meeting or something,
and he's gone with her."

"Is no one at home?"

"I'm here, and Marian's somewhere about, I guess. Was you
calculatin' to show goods or solicit anythin'? We hain't no
call for dress-makers' charts, and we don't want to subscribe
to no cook-books, I'm cook-book enough myself."

Dorothy smiled. "Oh, no. I don't make my living that way," she
answered cheerfully. "Perhaps I'd better see the little girl,
Miss----" she added after a few moments' thought.

"Hepzibah Toothacre is my name," remarked the gaunt woman as she
turned away leaving the young lady standing on the step.

Dorothy made a wry face. "Toothacre or some kind of acher I should
think," she said to herself. "She looked sour enough to be several
kinds of ache rolled in one. I hope the rest of the family are not
like that."

She did not have to wait long before a little girl came along the
dim entry toward her. She was brown-haired, brown-eyed, dark-skinned
and rather pale. She wore a plain blue gingham frock, and her hair
was tied in two pig-tails with a narrow black ribbon. She paused
timidly at sight of a stranger, but at Miss Dorothy's smile she came
forward eagerly. "Oh, are you--are you----" she began.

"The new teacher?" interrupted Miss Dorothy. "Yes, dear, I am. May
I come in? The ogress that guards your castle looked as if she might
make a meal of me and I was afraid to come any further."

Marian looked puzzled for a moment, then her face broke into a
smile. "Oh, you mean Heppy. She is rather cross sometimes. She
was not very polite not to ask you in, but she is in a bad humor
to-day; there were two peddlers here this morning and she can't
bear peddlers."

"She thought I was one, and that was why she was so grouchy,
I see."

"I will go and ask her to show you to your room," returned Marian;
"it is all ready."

"Can't you show me?" asked Miss Dorothy with whimsical anxiety in
her tones.

Marian laughed; she knew that Miss Dorothy was only pretending to be
afraid of Heppy, and the pretense made her seem more like a little
girl. "Of course I can show you up," she made answer. "Grandma
didn't expect you till the late train and she had to go to her
missionary society; she's president of the board, you see."

"Oh, yes, I quite understand. I didn't suppose, myself, that I
could get here till the late train, but I was able to make better
connections than I expected and here I am. My trunk will be along
after awhile. You are Maid Marian, I know, but I do not see the
greenwood and where are Robin Hood and his merry men?" Then seeing
that Marian hadn't a notion of what she meant, she said, "You don't
know them, do you? I'll have to tell you some time, you and the rest
of my scholars, for of course you are coming to my school."

"Oh, am I?" Marian's face was radiant.

"Why, yes, I imagine so. Don't you go to school?"

"I haven't been yet. Grandpa has always taught me at home,
you know."

"Oh, that's it." Miss Dorothy was taking off her hat, standing
before the mirror to puff out her soft ripples of hair. "What a
lovely big room this is," she remarked. "I never had such a big
room all to myself. We are such a large family that we always
have to double up, I don't mean like a jack-knife," she added
with a little laugh. "I wonder if I shall have to hunt for
myself in that big bed; if I do you will have to come and
find me, for I might get hopelessly lost if you didn't."

Marian laughed. This merry talk was very delightful; even Mrs. Hunt
was never quite so fascinatingly entertaining. She stood gazing at
Miss Dorothy with admiring eyes as she put a few touches to her
dress. Surely it would mean great things to have a young lady in
the house.

Miss Dorothy gave a final survey of the room as she turned from the
mirror. "I like it," she said nodding to Marian, "and when I get
down those solemn-looking pictures, hang up my own favorites, put a
cheerful cover on that table and a couple of bright sofa pillows on
that lounge, and have some plants in that south window, it will be
very cozy."

"Oh, will you dare?" began Marian and then stopped short. There were
probably no lengths to which a teacher might not be allowed to go,
even by so particular a person as Grandma Otway.

"Why, what is there so very daring about that?" asked Miss Dorothy.
"It isn't like walking a tight-rope, or shooting Niagara Falls in a
canoe." There was a saucy look in her eyes as she spoke, and a
dimple came and went as she strove to keep her face grave.

"It isn't like that, of course," said Marian feebly. "It will be
your own room, and you are a grown-up lady who can do as you please.
I suppose it is only children who don't dare to do things like
moving pictures and putting flower-pots on the window-sills when
they are freshly painted."

Miss Dorothy's merry laugh rang out. "Oh, you dear, transparent
baby. You've spoken volumes in that speech. Now I'm ready to go
down. What shall we do? My trunk will not be here till after the
next train is in, they informed me at the station. I'd like to
see the schoolhouse, but perhaps we'd best wait till morning,
then it can be shown me officially. Could we dare to walk in
the garden if I promise not to race over the borders and
recklessly pull the flowers? Does one dare to leave the
house to do that?" There was a little mocking look in
her eyes as she spoke.

"Oh, yes, of course we can go anywhere we like in the garden,"
returned Marian. "Do come, and I will show you my apple tree. If you
are not afraid to climb you can see the ocean from my seat in the
crotch,--and the mountain, too," she added more soberly.

"Don't suggest mountains yet," said Miss Dorothy, becoming sober
too. "But there, I won't think about mountains; I've always managed
them and I always intend to."

Marian gazed at her with new intentness and drew nearer. "Can you
manage mountains?" she asked wonderingly.

"Why, yes; if you don't make them out of mole-hills it is easy
enough."

Marian pondered over this answer all the way down-stairs, but could
not make head or tail of it. She would ask further when she knew
Miss Dorothy better. She felt quite assured that she would not be
long in feeling as much at home with her as with Mrs. Hunt.

As they passed the kitchen door near which the grim Hepzibah stood,
Miss Dorothy drew her skirts aside and fled down the garden walk,
giving a pretended scared look over her shoulder as she caught
Marian's hand. "Don't let her get me, will you?" she said. Marian
fell in with her mood and promised that she should not be delivered
to the ogress, though in her heart of hearts she felt that a person
who would dare to take liberties with Grandma Otway's best room
surely could not be a very scary individual, and by the time they
had reached the apple tree, she had decided that Miss Dorothy would
probably have no fear of climbing to the very top, if she cared to.

"The Garden of Hesperides and the Golden Apples!" exclaimed Miss
Dorothy, settling down into the crotch and giving Marian a hand to
help her to a seat by her side. "Isn't this too lovely for
anything? It will be the finest place in the world to come and read
fairy-tales. Do you know many? I have brought a lot with me, and
we'll have a lovely time here before it gets too cold to stay out."

"I don't know many fairy-tales," Marian answered doubtfully.
"Grandma doesn't exactly approve of them; at least she never tells
me any. She says that Bible stories are entertaining enough for any
one, and she lets me read those 'simplified for the understanding of
a child.'" She spoke with perfect gravity, though Miss Dorothy
turned her head to hide the smile she could not prevent.

"I suppose, then," said Miss Dorothy, "that you have a book of
those."

"Yes; it belonged to grandpa when he was small, and it is called
'Tales from the Bible, simplified for the understanding of a child';
I read it generally on Sundays. Mrs. Hunt knows about Cinderella and
the Glass Slipper and about the Pig that huffed and puffed till he
blew the house down."

"Oh, I don't know that last one," said Miss Dorothy; "you will have
to tell me, and I'll tell you about the Golden Apples. Don't the
apples smell good? Do we dare have any of them when they are ripe?"

"Oh, yes, we can have two a day; one in the morning and one at noon;
grandma says they are lead at night."

"Goodness me! I believe I have heard that saying before," said Miss
Dorothy, mentally determining to carry apples to her room to eat
when she felt inclined. Mrs. Otway should not decide such matters
for her. She sat with her chin in her hand looking off at the ocean,
blue in the distance. Marian, watching her, decided that although
the new teacher did not exactly fill her expectations in some
respects, in others she far exceeded them. She had very blue eyes
that could be merry or soft as her mood was, her hair was wavy and
of a light brown color; she was fair of skin, had rather a large
mouth and not a specially beautiful nose, but she was good to look
upon and the more one looked the more charming one thought her. She
was dressed very simply in a gray traveling gown with no jewelry but
a silver pin fastening her collar. Her face in repose was serious
and Marian could see that she was not one to be trifled with, in
spite of her fun-loving spirit.

"There are many things I want to know," said Miss Dorothy after a
while, "but I will wait till I absolutely have to ask questions."

"If you want to know one thing," returned Marian, "I can tell you.
If you would like me to tell you when grandpa and grandma will be
here I can say in about five minutes." She was looking off down the
street and Miss Dorothy saw two figures approaching.

"Then we'd better go in," she said. "I should not like them to meet
me in an apple tree; they might think me very undignified."

Marian was rather inclined to think they might, but she glossed over
the fact by saying, "Well, you see it has been such a long, long
time since they were young they must forget how it feels."

Miss Dorothy smiled and began to climb down the ladder, Marian
following. In a few minutes they were walking soberly up the path
and reached the front door just as Mr. and Mrs. Otway were there.

"Miss Robbins has come," announced Marian with a little nod of her
head in the direction of the young lady in the background.

"Ah-h," responded her grandfather, "then I was right, my dear," he
turned to his wife, "I said it was probable that she would get the
first train. We should have told Hepzibah or else you should have
remained at home."

"I never remain at home from the quarterly meeting upon any
pretext," returned Mrs. Otway firmly; "it was a most important one."

But Mr. Otway had hastened forward and was holding out his hand in
welcome to Miss Dorothy. "I am glad to receive my old friend's
daughter," he said with a stately bow. "This is Miss--ah, yes,
Miss Dorothy. I may have met you when you were less of a young
lady, but I cannot separate you, as a memory, from your sisters."

"I think I remember Professor Otway," returned Dorothy smiling up
into the near-sighted eyes which were peering down at her. Mr. Otway
was tall, spare, a little stoop-shouldered. His hair was quite gray
and grew sparsely around his temples; his face was clean shaven.
Mrs. Otway was below medium height, plump and keen-eyed. She wore an
old-fashioned gown and a plain bonnet. Winter or summer she never
went out without a small cape over her shoulders. Upon this occasion
it was of black silk trimmed with a fold of the same. She looked
approvingly at Dorothy's neat frock, but a little disapprovingly
at the arrangement of her hair.

"I am sorry not to have been here to welcome you," she said, "but
there are certain matters of business which cannot be set aside for
uncertainties. I hope Hepzibah or Marian showed you to your room."

"Marian did, and has been a very kind hostess," returned Miss
Dorothy. "I am very glad you did not give up an important matter
for anything so indefinite as my arrival. You must never let my
presence allow of any change in your arrangements, Mrs. Otway. I
am exceedingly grateful to you for taking me in, and I should be
very uncomfortable if I were to interfere with your usual routine."

Mrs. Otway nodded approval. "We shall consider you one of the
family, my dear Miss Robbins," she told her. "Marian, take my things
up-stairs." She gave her bonnet and cape to her granddaughter and
led the way to the semi-darkened parlor where she established
herself in a haircloth rocking-chair while Miss Dorothy seated
herself upon the sofa.

Marian laid the bonnet and cape carefully upon her grandmother's
smooth bed and went down to tell Hepzibah that it was the teacher,
who had arrived. She had not wanted to leave Miss Dorothy, in order
to give the old servant this piece of information, but now that her
chance had come she went straight to the kitchen.

Hepzibah was stalking about preparing supper. She looked up sharply
as Marian entered. "Well," she said, "what's wanting?"

"It's Miss Robbins, the teacher, Heppy," Marian told her. "You saw
us go by down the garden, didn't you?"

"Why didn't she say so?" returned Heppy in an aggrieved voice.
"How's I to know she wasn't a book-agent or a body selling home-made
laces and embroidered shirt waists. She was carrying a bag and it
might have been full of wares for all I knew."

"But she doesn't look like a peddler."

"Looks belie folks sometimes. Some of 'em is dressed as good as the
best, in hats with feathers and kid gloves. She might have been that
or anything, for all I could tell. I'll do just the same next time.
She'd oughter have told her business right out, instead of hemming
and hawing and asking was Mrs. Otway to home. That's the way they
all do; get the name next door and come as brazen as you please
asking for Mrs. this and that. I'd like to know who's to tell the
sheep from the goats."

"I would know in a minute that Miss Dorothy wasn't a goat," said
Marian.

"Oh, you know a heap, don't you," replied Heppy scornfully. "If you
knew so much why didn't you tell me who it was first off?"

"I didn't know exactly who it was but I could easily guess, for I
knew the teacher was coming some time soon."

"I don't see why your grandma didn't say I was to look out for her,"
Heppy went on with a new grievance.

"Maybe she thought you would know, because you helped get her room
ready, and knew she was expected," Marian made excuse.

"As if I could remember anything on a Saturday, when I'd been
pestered to death, answering the door a dozen times, while I was
cleaning my kitchen. She might have chose some other day to come."

"She has to begin school on Monday, and besides that would be just
as bad, for it would be wash-day and you are cross always then,
Heppy, you know you are."

Heppy turned on her. "You just go out of here," she said. "I don't
want you 'round underfoot, pestering me at meal-time nohow. I guess
I can get a meal for four just as easy as for three and I don't need
your help neither."

At this Marian was fain to depart, seeing that Heppy was in one of
her worst moods, when everything was a grievance. It was a pleasant
contrast when the little girl was met by Miss Dorothy's smile as she
returned to the parlor, so she settled herself by the side of this
new friend, folded her hands and let her feet dangle over the edge
of the sofa. It was rather a slippery seat and in time it might be
that she would have to wriggle back to a firmer place, but its
nearness to Miss Dorothy was its attraction and she felt well
satisfied and entirely secure when the teacher's arm encircled
her and drew her closer. "I am to have one new pupil anyhow,"
said Miss Dorothy, smiling down. "Won't it be nice for us to
be going to school together every day, Marian?"

"Oh, am I going?" Marian looked from one grandparent to another.

Mrs. Otway nodded sedately. "We have concluded that it is best," she
said. "Your grandfather has many affairs to attend to, and it is a
tax upon his time to teach you, therefore, since you will not need
to go to school unattended, we think it best. We shall see how it
works, at all events, and if it seems wise to withdraw you later,
we can do so."

Marian gave a long sigh of satisfaction, but said nothing. She was
constantly told that little children should be seen and not heard,
and moreover she thought it might hurt her grandfather's feelings if
she showed too much pleasure at the change. Yet when she gave the
new teacher a glad smile, Miss Dorothy realized that the prospect of
school was a pleasant one to at least one of her pupils.




_CHAPTER III_

_A New Road_


Instead of sitting in a straight-backed chair in her grandfather's
study, conning over dry lessons while Mr. Otway wrote or read, it
was quite a different experience for Marian to go to school to Miss
Dorothy in a cheerful little schoolhouse where twenty other girls
were seated each before her particular desk. Lessons with Grandpa
Otway had been very stupid, for he required literal, word-for-word,
gotten-by-heart pages, had no mercy upon faulty spelling, and
frowned down mistakes in arithmetic examples. He did not make much
of a point of writing, for he wrote a queer, scratchy hand himself,
and so Marian could scarcely form her letters legibly, a fact of
which she was made ashamed when she saw how well Ruth Deering wrote,
and discovered that Marjorie Stone sent a letter every week to her
brother at college.

However, the rest of it was such an improvement upon other years,
that every morning Marian started out very happily, book bag on arm,
and Miss Dorothy by her side. The first day was the most eventful,
of course, and the child was in a quiver of excitement. Her teacher
was perhaps not less nervous, though she did not show it except by
the two red spots upon her cheeks. It was her first day as teacher
as well as Marian's, as one of a class in school. But all passed off
well, the twenty little girls with shining faces and fresh frocks
were expectant and the new teacher quite came up to their hopes.
Marian already knew Ruth Deering and Marjorie Stone, for they were
in her Sunday-school class, and some of the others she had seen at
church. Alice Evans sat with her parents just in front of the
Otways' pew, so her flaxen pig-tails were a familiar sight, while
Minnie Keating's big brown bow of ribbon appeared further along on
Sunday mornings.

Marian felt that she did quite as well as the other girls in most
things, and was beginning to congratulate herself upon knowing as
much as any one of her age, when she was called to the blackboard to
write out a sentence. At her feeble effort which resulted in a
crooked scrawl, there was a subdued titter from the others. For one
moment the new scholar stood, her cheeks flaming, then with defiant
face she turned to Miss Dorothy. "I can spell it every word," she
said, "if I can't write it."

Miss Dorothy smiled encouragingly, for she understood the situation.
"That is more than many little girls of your age can do," she said.
"Suppose you spell it for us, then."

With clenched hands Marian faced her schoolmates. "Separate
syllables, and enunciate with distinct emphasis," she finished
triumphantly, without looking at the book.

"That is a very good test," said Miss Dorothy; "you may take your
seat. Now, Alice, I will give out the next sentence, and you may
spell it without the board," and the day was saved for Marian.

After this she triumphantly gave the boundaries of several
countries, told without hesitation the dates of three important
events in history, carried to a correct finish a difficult example
in long division, and when the hour came for school to close she had
won her place. Yet the matter of writing was uppermost in her mind
as she walked home, and she said shamefacedly to Miss Dorothy,
"Isn't it dreadful for a girl of my age not to know how to write?"

"It isn't as if it were a thing that couldn't be learned," Miss
Dorothy told her for her encouragement, "but you must hurry up and
conquer it. You might practice at home between times, and you will
be surprised to find how you improve. Have you never written letters
to your father?"

Marian shook her head. "Not really myself. Grandma always writes
them for me," then she added, "so of course she says just what she
pleases; I'd like to say what I please, I think."

"I am sure your father would like it better if you did. I know when
my father was away from home the letter that most pleased him was
written by my little sister Patty when she was younger than you."

"How old is she now?" asked Marian.

"Just about your age. She can write very well, but you can distance
her in spelling and arithmetic."

"I'll catch up with her in writing," decided Marian, "and maybe she
will catch up with me in the other things."

"I'll tell her what you say," said Miss Dorothy; "that will be an
incentive to you both. I should like you to know our Patty. She is
our baby, and is a darling."

"I should like to know her," returned Marian warmly.

"I'll tell her to write to you," promised Miss Dorothy.

"Oh, good! I never have letters from any one but papa, and he writes
only once a year. I wish he would write oftener, for his letters are
so nice, and I do love him, though I haven't seen him since I was a
baby."

"Perhaps if he knew you really cared so much to hear, he would
write. Why don't you send him a letter and tell him?"

"Oh, but just see what a fist I make at writing. I will tell him as
soon as I can write better, although," she added with a sigh, "that
seems a long time to wait."

Miss Dorothy was thoughtfully silent for a few minutes. "I will tell
you what," she said presently. "I have a small typewriting machine
which I will teach you how to use. It is very simple, and you spell
so nicely that it will be no time before you could manage a
perfectly legible letter to your father."

"Oh, Miss Dorothy, I do love you," cried Marian. "That is such a
delightful idea. What an angelic sister Patty has."

Miss Dorothy laughed. "What a funny little girl you are. I am glad,
however, that you didn't say: How awfully nice! I am afraid that is
what Patty would have said, but she hasn't had the advantage of
associating with only scholarly people like your grandparents, and
so she talks as her brothers and sisters do."

"I should think she would be awfully happy to have so many brothers
and sisters," remarked Marian.

"Oh, dear, see what example does," exclaimed Miss Dorothy. "You said
awfully happy and I never heard you say awfully anything before.
I'll tell you what we'll do; whenever you hear me saying awfully
nice or awfully horrid you tell me, and I'll do the same by you. Is
it a bargain?"

"Oh, yes, thank you, Miss Dorothy, but I'm afraid I should feel
queer to correct you."

"I am not perfect, my dear," said Miss Dorothy gravely, "not any
more than the rest of humanity. I shouldn't expect you to correct me
ordinarily, but this is a habit I want to get out of, and that I do
not want you to get into, so we shall be a mutual help, you see, and
you will be doing me a favor by reminding me."

"Then I'll try to do it. How shall I tell you when other people are
around? It would sound queer if I said: Oh, Miss Dorothy, you said
awfully."

"So it would, you little wiseacre. You can touch me on the elbow and
then put your finger on your lip, and I will understand, and I will
do the same when you say it."

Marian was perfectly satisfied at this. "I am so glad you are here,"
she sighed. "I feel lots more faith growing. I shall soon be
very--is it faithful I ought to say?"

"Well, not exactly in the sense you mean, though really it ought to
be that faithful means full of faith; as it is it means trustworthy
and devoted to the performance of duties and things. I think the old
meaning when one wanted to say that a person was full of faith was
faithful, but the original sense of many words has been lost."

"When shall I begin with the typewriter?" asked Marian, changing the
subject.

"We can begin this afternoon. I have unpacked and oiled it, so it is
all ready to use."

"How soon do you think I can send a letter to papa?"

"If you are industrious and painstaking I should say you could do it
in a week."

"Oh, that's not long, and he will get it long before Christmas,
won't he?"

"Yes, indeed! I should think in ten days or two weeks at the
furthest."

"I should like to send him something for Christmas. I never did send
him anything. Don't you think it would be nice to do it?"

"I think it would be awfully nice."

Marian gave her teacher's arm a gentle shake and put her finger to
her lip.

Miss Dorothy looked at her a little puzzled, then she understood.
"Oh, I said awfully, didn't I? Thank you, dearie, for reminding me.
What should you like to send your father?"

"I don't know. I'll have to think. You'll help me to think, won't
you?"

"Indeed I will, if you want me to. I should think almost anything
you could send would please him, for, after all, it is the thought
that counts, not the thing itself."

"Oh, but I do think things count, and--Miss Dorothy, you won't tell
if I ask him not to send me money."

"Not money? I think that it's rather a nice thing to have, for then
you can buy whatever you like."

"You couldn't if you were I."

"Why not?"

"Because. You won't say anything about it to the grans?" Marian's
voice dropped to a whisper. "When papa sends me money it always goes
to the missions; it is my sacrifice, Grandma says. As long as I
don't have the money really in my hands, it doesn't so much matter,
but it would matter if I had to go without butter or perhaps sweet
things, like dessert or cake for a whole month. That is what would
happen if I said I would rather have the money myself than let the
missionaries have it. Oh, I suppose it is all right," she added
quickly, "and no doubt I am a hardened sinner, but I would like a
real Christmas gift."

"Did you never have one?" asked Miss Dorothy, with pity and surprise
in her voice.

"Not a really one, except from Mrs. Hunt; she gave me a sweet little
pincushion last year, and a whole bag full of cakes and goodies. I
enjoyed them very much."

"Did your grandparents give you nothing at all?"

"Oh, yes. I had a new hat, and gloves and handkerchiefs. I was
pleased to have them of course, but I would like something real
Christmassy and--and--foolish."

"You blessed child, of course you would," and Miss Dorothy mentally
determined that the next Christmas should provide something real
Christmassy for her little companion.

Marian was silent for a while then she asked, "Do you have a
Christmas tree at your house?"

"Why, yes, always, and we all hang up our stocking from father down
to Patty. Don't you?"

"No, I never did, and I never had a tree."

"Why, you poor dear child," exclaimed Miss Dorothy surprised out of
discretion.

"There doesn't any one know how much I want it," said Marian in part
excuse, "but I do. That is what I meant about moving mountains and
faith. Do you believe if I had a great deal of faith, as sharp and
strong as a mustard seed that the Lord would send me a tree? I never
told any one before about it, but you understand better than Mrs.
Hunt. I thought once or twice I would ask her, but she might laugh
and I don't want any one to laugh, for it is very solemn." She
peered anxiously up into Miss Dorothy's face to see if there were a
suspicion of amusement there, but Miss Dorothy looked as grave as
any one could wish.

"I think faith can do a great deal, my dear little girl," she said
gently.

"It can move mountains, the Bible says. I heard grandpa and grandma
talking about it, and Mrs. Hunt showed me some mustard seed. I
tasted one and it was very strong, so I know now it doesn't mean
the bigness but the strongness."

Miss Dorothy looked down with a smile. "You little theologian," she
exclaimed. Then to herself she said: This comes of shutting up a
child with staid old people. The dear thing needs a whole lot of
frivolity mixed up in her life; Christmas trees and things. She
shall have them if I can do any of the mixing. "Well, dear," she
said aloud, "I think we will hold on to all the faith we can muster,
and see what will come of it, but you must realize that just sitting
still and believing isn't all of it. We must work, too, for the
Bible says faith _and_ works, not faith _or_ works. So now you work
hard over your writing, and send letters to your father so he will
know what his little girl likes and longs for, then you will be
doing your part in that direction, and at the same time put your
trust in his love for you, and no doubt something beautiful will
come of it all. You can come up to my room as soon as you want to,
and we will start the little typewriter."

Marian's satisfaction was too deep for words, but she gave her
teacher's arm a little squeeze and laid her cheek against it.

It was not long before she was tapping at the door of Miss Dorothy's
room, but before she began the work she was so eager for, she
asked, "Do you think I ought to ask grandma's permission?"

"I don't see why you need to, for there is nothing wrong about it,"
Miss Dorothy replied. "But if you feel as if you should, you can run
down and tell your grandmother what you are going to do. You can say
that I am going to teach you to use my little machine, and surely
she will not object."

But Mrs. Otway was off upon some charity bent, and Marian returned
feeling that she had done her duty in making the attempt to tell.
Then she and Miss Dorothy had great fun over the little machine
which seemed so complicated at first, but which gradually grew more
and more familiar, so that at the end of an hour under Miss Dorothy,
Marian was able to write out several lines quite creditably. These
she took down and proudly showed to her grandfather.

"First-rate," he exclaimed. "Keep on, my child, and after a while
you will be able to copy out my papers for me; a great assistance
that would be. I shouldn't wonder but in time you would make me an
excellent secretary." Under this praise Marian's qualms of
conscience were eased. If grandpa approved, that was enough. Her
next impulse was to run to Mrs. Hunt's to show off her new
accomplishment, but she decided to wait till she could manage the
typewriter entirely alone, so would the credit be greater.

She sought out Tippy and Dippy to tell her secret to. They were her
confidants always, and to-day she had almost forgotten them in the
novelty of having so sympathetic a friend as Miss Dorothy. It would
never do to forsake old and tried comrades, and so Tippy was roused
from her nap, and Dippy was captured in the act of catching a
grasshopper, then the two were borne to the end of the garden to
a sheltered spot where Marian always had her "thinks." She took
the two in her lap. Tippy settled down at once, but Dippy had to
have his head rubbed for some minutes before he began to purr
contentedly.

"You see, my dears," began Marian, "I am going to have a great deal
to do, almost as much as grandma has with her clubs and societies
and meetings. First there is school. I think I like Alice Evans the
best of the girls, for she has such pretty hair, but I am not quite
sure about it. She was not quite as nice to me at recess as Ruth
was, so maybe I shall like Ruth best. I am sure I shall love Patty.
I wish she had come here with her sister. It must be lovely, Tippy,
to have a sister, though I suppose you don't think as I do, for you
had a sister once and now you don't care anything about her, for you
fizzed at her the other day when she came in our garden. I saw you
and heard you, too, and I was very much shocked. What was I talking
about? Oh, yes, about so much to do. I'll have lessons to study at
home after this, I suppose. We didn't have any real lessons to-day,
just trial things, and I did such awful--I mean really awful writing
on the blackboard that the girls all giggled. I just hated that, and
I felt like crying or like running away and never going back, but I
realized that it wouldn't do to do either, so that is another thing
I must do.

"I must practice writing at home. I wonder where I shall get paper
and things to do it on. I'll have to ask Miss Dorothy about that.
She is such a dear, Tippy, and she likes cats; she said so. I never
used to think that any one could be as nice as Mrs. Hunt, but Miss
Dorothy is nicer in some ways, for she understands just how you feel
about everything, and Mrs. Hunt doesn't always. She is as kind as
can be, but she thinks that when you ask questions if she answers
with a cookie or a doughnut you will be satisfied. It does satisfy
your mouth, of course, but it doesn't satisfy the thinking part of
you. Sometimes I go down there just bursting with things I want to
know, and when I ask her, she says: 'Oh, don't bother your little
head about such things; there is a plate of cakes in the pantry; go
help yourself.' Now, Miss Dorothy isn't that way at all. She just
reaches her thinks down to yours and they go along together till
you come out all clear and straight like coming out of the woods
into an open sunshiny place where there is a good path.

"Now, Tippy, we've got to think of something to send papa for a
present. I don't suppose you are interested in such things, but I
think every one ought to be. Maybe Patty can help me out. She must
be a very bright child; Miss Dorothy says she is. There! I hear
Heppy clattering the milk-pan; it is time to see about your
supper." So saying, Marian put down the two cats and started for
the house, her pets following at her heels, knowing the sound of
a milk-pan as well as she.




_CHAPTER IV_

_Companions_


The first week of school passed very rapidly, and by the time Friday
afternoon came, Marian felt quite at home with her schoolmates. She
had finally decided that Ruth would be her best friend next to
Patty, whom she always held in reserve as filling her needs exactly,
when they should meet. Miss Dorothy had written to her little sister
and Marian was daily expecting a letter herself from Patty, a letter
which should mark the beginning of their friendship. She was rather
shy of the girls at first, for she had scarcely known childish
comrades, and her old-fashioned ideas and mature way of speaking
often brought a laugh from the others, but her shyness soon wore off
and she quickly acquired a style of speech at which her grandparents
sometimes frowned, for it included some bits of slang which had
never found their way into the brick house before.

It was Miss Dorothy's doing which made the way easier for the little
girl, for she argued nobly in behalf of Marian's needing young
companions to keep her like a normal child. She even appealed to
the family doctor who promptly sided with her, and maintained that
Marian would be better bodily, if she lived a more rough and tumble
life. So, because her grandparents really did care for her, absorbed
as they were in their grown-up affairs, Marian was allowed more
freedom than ever before and was ready to take advantage of it.

Miss Dorothy had gone up to town to do some shopping this first
Saturday of the term, and Marian bethought herself of its being
baking day at Mrs. Hunt's, so, as this was always one place she
could always go without asking permission, she simply stopped at
the sitting-room door and announced: "I am going down to Mrs.
Hunt's, grandma."

Mrs. Otway, at work upon a financial report, did not look up from
her columns of figures, but merely nodded in reply and Marian ran on
down the street between the double rows of trees, till she came to
Mrs. Hunt's. This time it was the odor of baking which greeted her
as she advanced toward the kitchen, and Mrs. Hunt was in the act of
taking a pan of nicely browned cookies from the oven as her visitor
appeared.

"Well, well, well," she exclaimed. "Just in time. Seems to me school
keeps some folks amazingly busy. I've not seen you for a week, have
I? But there, I'm glad enough you're turned out at last. Let me see
how you look. School agrees with you; I can see that. Sit down there
on the step and eat a cookie; it's warm inside the kitchen with the
fire going. Now tell me all about it. How do you like Miss Robbins?
I hear she's liable to be as popular as any teacher we've had. How
do the grans take to her?" Marian and Mrs. Hunt always spoke of Mr.
and Mrs. Otway as the grans.

"They like her," returned Marian between bites of cookie. "She is
perfectly fine, Mrs. Hunt, and she's got a little sister just my
age; her name's Martha, but they call her Patty, and she's going to
write to me, and, oh, Mrs. Hunt, I have a secret to tell you, but
you mustn't breathe it. Cross your heart you won't."

"Cross your heart," repeated Mrs. Hunt. "Where did you get that? I
never heard you say that before."

"All the girls say it."

"Of course they do, and you're getting to be one of the girls, I
see. Well, I'm glad of it. And what's the mighty secret?"

"You won't tell?"

"Not I." Mrs. Hunt emphasized her promise by bringing down her
cake-cutter firmly on the dough she had spread on the board before
her.

"Well, it's this: I'm learning to write on the typewriter, and I'm
going to write a letter to papa myself."

"Well, I vow to man! Isn't that a trick worth knowing? Won't he be
pleased?"

"Do you think he really will? I didn't know, for you see he has
written to me only once a year just as he does to grandpa and
grandma, and I have never been sure that he really cared very much
about me."

"Listen to the child," exclaimed Mrs. Hunt, shaking her head. "Who'd
have thought she gave it any thought one way or the other. Don't you
believe that he doesn't care. I knew Ralph Otway before you were
born, and I can tell you that when he gets to knowing that you've
thought enough about him to want to write to him he will write to
you often enough. He's got it into his head that you are as well off
not hearing from him oftener, and besides he feels that as a lone
widower he can't take as good care of you as his mother, a woman,
can do, and he's just steeled his heart to endure what he thinks is
best for you without thinking of what he would like for himself.
Don't you suppose he would a thousand times rather have you with him
than to live off there by himself?"

"No, I didn't think so," replied Marian, with the idea that somehow
she had said something she ought not. "But, Mrs. Hunt, if he does
care, why doesn't he come over and get me?"

"Just as I told you; because he thinks you are better off here with
your kith and kin. What would you do all day alone, with him off at
his business and you by yourself in lodgings or a boarding-house,
I'd like to know. He wouldn't want to send you to boarding-school,
for then you'd not be so well off as where you are. Oh, no, don't
you be getting it into your head that your father doesn't care for
you." Mrs. Hunt made decided plunges at the yellow dough at each
attack leaving behind a scalloped circle. "How I talk," she said as
she deftly lifted the cookies into a pan, "but my tongue runs away
with me sometimes. When do you think you'll be smart enough to get
that letter off?"

"Oh, in another week, perhaps. Miss Dorothy thinks I will."

"Humph! that's quick enough work. Here, don't you want to go down
into the garden and get me a few tomatoes? I thought I'd stew some
for dinner, and I can't leave my baking very well."

This was something Marian always liked to do, so she took the little
round basket Mrs. Hunt handed her and was soon very busy among the
tomato vines. She was watching a big yellow butterfly bury itself in
an opening flower when she heard a voice on the other side of the
fence, say: "Hello!" and looking up she saw Marjorie Stone and Alice
Evans smiling at her.

"What are you doing?" asked Marjorie. "I didn't know you lived
here."

"I don't," said Marian going toward her. "I just came to see Mrs.
Hunt and I am getting some tomatoes for her. Most everything else
has gone. There used to be lovely currants and raspberries over
there, and there were a few blackberries."

"We know where there are some blackberries still, don't we, Alice?"
said Marjorie.

"Yes, they have ripened late; they're not so very big, but we are
going to get them. We're going to take our lunch with us and gather
all we can find."

"If you bring some lunch you can go too," said Marjorie amiably to
Marian.

"Oh, is it a picnic?"

"Just a little one. Three or four of us were going, but two of the
girls can't go. One has to stay at home and take care of the baby,
and the other has gone to town with her mother, but maybe Alice's
big sister, Stella, will go with us."

"Is it very far?"

"Not so very. We've often been there. You go get your lunch and put
it in a tin bucket, or a basket, so you will have something to carry
your blackberries home in. We'll wait here for you if you hurry."

Much excited, Marian ran back to the house. This came of having
schoolmates. A picnic this very first Saturday, and the
blackberrying thrown in. She set down the little basket on the
kitchen table and exclaimed, "Oh, Mrs. Hunt, what do you think?
Marjorie Stone and Alice Evans want me to go on a picnic with them.
They're going blackberrying and it isn't very far, but I'll have to
take my lunch in something to gather the blackberries in, and----"
She paused for breath.

"Just those two going?"

"No, Alice's big sister, Stella, is going."

"Oh!" Mrs. Hunt nodded her head in a satisfied way.

"Do you think I would have time to go home?" Marian asked anxiously.
"They said they were in a great hurry."

"What is the use of your going home? I can put you up a little lunch
easy as not. Here's these cookies, and I've baked turnovers, too.
There's a basket of nice good apples in the pantry; you can have one
of those, and I'll whisk together some sandwiches in the shake of a
sheep's tail."

"Oh, that would be perfectly fine. Do you think grandma would
mind?"

"She oughtn't to. She's done the same thing lots of times herself."

"Oh!" This fact certainly set things all right, for surely no grown
person could be so absolutely unjust and inconsistent as to blame a
child for doing what she had done, not once, but often herself. So
Marian was quite assured, and smilingly watched Mrs. Hunt's kind
hands pack a lunch for her.

"There now," said the good woman when she had tucked a red napkin
over the top of the basket. "Run along and have a good time. I guess
all the quarts of blackberries you get won't make many jars of jam,
but you'll have just as much fun. If I get the chance I'll run up to
your grandma's or send word that you won't be home to dinner. Maybe
I'll see your grandpa as he comes back from the post-office."

And so, well content, Marian sped forth to join the girls who were
waiting.

"Are you going?" they asked. "You didn't have to go home, did you?"

"No, Mrs. Hunt put up a lunch for me. She is always so very kind."

"What have you got?" asked Marjorie eagerly.

"Three sandwiches, ham ones, and six cookies, two turnovers and an
apple." Marian enumerated the articles with pride.

"I guess that will be enough," said Marjorie, condescendingly. "But
you will have to cut the turnovers in two so they will go around; we
haven't any, you know."

Marian felt somewhat abashed, and thought that Marjorie was not very
polite. She would not have inquired into the contents of their lunch
baskets for the world. However, she trotted along very contentedly
till they reached Alice's home where Stella was to join them. "I
found some crackers and cheese, and there are two slices of bread
and jam," announced this older girl as she came out. "I think
perhaps we can find an apple tree along the way. Did you bring
anything, Marjorie?"

"Yes, I have something in here." Marjorie swung her tin bucket
in air.

"Then we'd better start," continued Stella. "Who is that with you?
Oh, I see, it is Marian Otway. Hello, Marian."

"How do you do?" said Marian. She had never seen Stella except from
across the church. She considered her quite a young lady, although
she was only fourteen, but she was tall for her age and had an
assured air.

The weather was warm, as it often is in early September, and as they
trudged along the dusty road with the noonday sun beating down upon
them, Marian thought it was anything but fun. Stella, however, kept
encouraging them all by telling them it was only a little further,
and that when they came to a certain big tree they would sit down
and eat their lunch. The tree seemed a long way off, but at length
it was reached, and the four sat down to rest under its shade.

"Oh, I do wish I had a drink," sighed Alice. "I am so thirsty."

"So am I," exclaimed the others.

"Maybe there is a spring near," said Stella. "There is a house over
yonder; perhaps they could let us have some milk."

"But we haven't any money to pay for it," said Alice.

"So we haven't. Well, we'll have to ask for water. It was very
stupid to think of only being hungry and not of being thirsty. We
could have brought some milk as well as not. Let us have your tin
bucket, Marjorie, and you and Alice go over and ask for some water."

"I'm too tired," complained Marjorie. "If I lend you my bucket I
think some one else ought to go for the water."

"Oh, all right," said Stella with a disdainful smile. "I am sure
Marian will be accommodating enough to go with Alice, although you
have walked no further than they did. You will go, won't you,
Marian?"

At this direct appeal, Marian could not refuse to go, and arose with
alacrity to do Stella's bidding.

"Empty your bucket into my basket," said Stella to Marjorie, at the
same time taking off the lid. Marjorie made a dive into the bucket
and hastily secured a small package wrapped in paper, consenting to
Stella's putting the two biscuits and the one banana that remained,
into her basket.

"Don't begin to eat till we come back," called Alice as she and
Marian started off.

"We won't," promised her sister.

The way through the open field was quite as hot, if not as dusty as
the road, and Marian agreed with Alice that it was harder to walk
through the stubble than the dust, so they were glad enough to reach
the shade of the trees surrounding the little farmhouse. A woman was
scouring tins on the back porch.

"Could we have some water from your pump?" asked Alice timidly.

The woman looked up. "Why, yes, and welcome. Where did you drop
from? I ain't seen any carriage come up the road."

"We walked from Greenville," Alice told her.

"All the way this warm day? Well, I should think you would want
water. You two didn't come by yourselves, did you?"

"No, my sister and another girl are over there by that big chestnut
tree."

"Lands! then why didn't you go to the spring? 'T ain't but a step,
just a ways beyond the tree down in that little hollow. I think the
water's better and colder than the pump water, but you can have
either you like. Perhaps, though, you'd like a glass of milk. But
there, you just wait, I know something better than that. Just set
down and cool off while I fetch something for you to take back.
Don't take a drink till you set awhile; you're all overheated."

"What do you suppose she's going to give us?" whispered Alice.

Marian shook her head. "I'd like water better than anything, but she
said we'd best wait and I'm going to."

"Then I will," said Alice, not to be outdone.

Presently the woman returned with a pitcher upon which stood cool
beads of moisture, while the clinking sound of ice from within
suggested deliciousness to the thirsty. Setting down a glass the
woman poured something into it, and then handed the glass to Marian
who politely offered it to Alice. It was quickly accepted and Alice
took a satisfying draught. "It is lemonade," she said, "and it is,
oh, so good. I never tasted anything so good."

The woman laughed. "You never were more thirsty, maybe. Take your
time; I'll get another glass." She stepped inside to supply Marian
with the same treat. "I'll pour the rest into your pail," she said;
"it will go good with your lunch. I made a whole bucketful this
morning thinking maybe my husband's folks might come over for
Sunday and would be thirsty after their long drive, but it's too
late for 'em now. They always start by sunup and get here before
dinner. They won't be here this week, so you come in for what
they don't."

"I'm glad they didn't come," said Alice setting down her glass.

The woman laughed. "It's an ill wind that blows nobody good,
they say. Here's your pail; there's ice enough to keep it cool
for some time."

"Thank you so very, very much," said Marian earnestly. "If I get
enough blackberries I'll surely bring you some."

"Bless the child! You needn't, for I have had all I need, and have
put 'em up till I'm sick of the sight of 'em. Keep all you get and
I'm sure you're welcome; their time is about over and what you get
won't be worth much. I'm sure you're welcome to your drink." She
fell to scouring again, and the girls departed bearing the bucket
carefully.

"Wasn't she kind?" said Marian, in grateful remembrance, "and isn't
it nice to know about the spring?"

"Be careful," cried Alice in alarm, for just here Marian struck her
foot against a stubbly growth and came near falling, but recovered
her footing.

"Let me take it," said Alice, grasping the handle of the bucket.

"I'm sure I shall be glad if you will," replied Marian in a relieved
tone, "it would be too dreadful to spill any of that delicious
stuff."

However it was borne safely the rest of the way, and it is needless
to say that it was appreciated by the waiting pair, though Marjorie
complained that they had been such a long, long time in getting it.

"I should think it was worth being long to get what we did," said
Alice severely.

"Well, anyhow, I think Stella and I ought to have the most," said
Marjorie, "for you each had a glassful up at the house and we
haven't had any."

"That was to pay us for going, wasn't it?" and Alice appealed to her
sister.

"Certainly it was," returned Stella. "If you couldn't have that much
after your doing the errand I should think it was a pity."

Then they fell to eating their lunch, although the division of this
did not turn out as Marjorie intended, for Stella declared it was
only fair that each should eat what she brought for herself, and
maintained that Marjorie's biscuits and banana must be her share.
Marian protested, however, for she felt that she had the lion's
share, and that she would be uncomfortable if she ate her good
things without giving so much as a taste to the others. At last it
was decided that each child should contribute to the general supply
one article from her lunch, so a turnover went from Marian's basket,
a biscuit from Marjorie's pail, while Alice and Stella contributed
some crackers and cheese and a slice of their bread and jam. No one
caring for Marjorie's biscuit it was left untouched while its owner
fell upon the turnover without a question. Marian chose the crackers
and cheese, but insisted upon exchanging some of her cookies for the
slice of bread and jam, and later gave Alice half her apple. The
lemonade was quaffed to the last drop, and then Marjorie volunteered
to go to the spring for water. She was gone some time, and as they
all started forth to find the blackberry patch, Alice whispered to
Marian, "She had candy in that package; that's why she wanted to go
to the spring alone. I saw her take out the candy and eat it." Then
Marian began to realize that her eyes were being opened to other
than pleasant things in that outside world of companionship.




_CHAPTER V_

_Blackberries_


Fortunately the blackberry patch was not much further on, and after
being refreshed by their luncheon the children did not mind crossing
a field and climbing a fence or two. But what a thicket it was! Such
thorns and briars as Marian had never imagined. There was a story in
verse, in one of the books which had belonged to her grandmother
when she was a little girl; this story was about Phebe, the
Blackberry Girl, and it was one in which Marian delighted, but
never before had she realized to the full extent Phebe's trials;
yet, like her, she

    "Scratched her face and tore her hair,
     But still did not complain,"

and furthermore, like Phebe, when she came to a promising bush, she
"picked with all her might," and really had a creditable amount to
show when Stella said time was up. But alas, she had other things
to show besides blackberries and scratches, for she had worn a frock
of light material, and by the time they were ready to leave the
thicket, it was in slits and tears all over. Marian had been so
excited over her novel employment that she had not seen what damage
the briars were doing till Marjorie laughed out: "Oh, what a rag-bag
you are!"

Then Marian looked down at the fringe of muslin which hung from her
waist, at the stained waist itself, from which the trimming fell in
festoons, and she was aghast. "Oh, what shall I do?" she breathed
helplessly.

"You certainly do look a sight," said Stella, none too comfortingly,
"but I wouldn't mind my clothes so much as my hands; just see how
they are all scratched up, and your face isn't much better. You were
too reckless; you ought not to have plunged in so far that you got
caught in the worst of the brambles; we didn't any of us plunge
around so as to get all mixed up that way."

"I know," returned Marian meekly, "I got too excited."

"I should think you did."

"I can't go into town this way," said Marian miserably. "I look like
a beggar girl."

"Anybody could see that you had been picking blackberries," said
Alice consolingly.

"But with such a looking frock they will laugh at me," said Marian
tearfully. "Oh, dear, I wish I had worn something that didn't tear."

"As the rest of us did," remarked Marjorie complacently.

"If you had only been careful and had kept on the edge of the
thicket," Stella said, then seeing how distressed Marian really
was, she went on: "You might take off your frock; I really think
you would look better without than with it."

"Oh!" Marian's cheeks flamed. To appear before the world
half-dressed was not to be thought of.

Stella looked her over critically. The frock she wore was a white
muslin spotted with pink, too frail a garment for such an
expedition.

"The waist isn't so terrible," said Alice examining it. "If we had
some pins we could fasten the trimming on so it wouldn't show the
tears much."

"Take off your frock, Marian," decided Stella; "I know what we can
do."

Marian obeyed the assured voice, and presently Stella was tearing
the ragged skirt from the waist, afterward pinning the trimming of
the waist in place. "Now come here," she said to Marian.

"What are you going to do?" the others asked in chorus.

"I am going to match your petticoat to your waist," said Stella,
addressing Marian. "I will dot it with pink, and it will never
be observed. You can wear the waist as it is, and have a skirt
to match."

"What are you going to spot it with?" asked Alice curiously.

"You'll see," answered her sister, taking a blackberry from her
basket and squeezing a little of the juice on Marian's petticoat.
"It isn't exactly the color, but it is near enough, and will never
be noticed unless you were very near. Now stand quite still,
Marian."

The little girl obeyed and after some time Stella finished her work.
"There!" she exclaimed with her head to one side to notice the
effect; "that is not bad at all. Walk off, Marian, and let me see;
the spots aren't quite even, but then, as Mrs. Hunt says, 'they will
never be seen on a galloping horse.'"

"I am sure they look very well," remarked Alice admiringly, "and I
think you were very clever to think of it, Stella." And Marian,
though still a little shamefaced, felt more at ease.

"We'd better start back," said Stella, "for the afternoons are not
so very long now, and we have quite a distance to go."

"If we didn't have blackberries in the two buckets we might get some
of that nice cold water from the spring and carry it with us," said
Alice, "and then if we were thirsty we should have something to
drink."

"It wouldn't be a bad plan," agreed Stella. "I'll tell you what we
can do: Marjorie can pour her berries in our bucket and we can use
hers for the water. Our bucket is so big that it will easily hold
ours and hers, too."

"I'd like to see me do it," spoke up Marjorie. "I'd be sure not
to get back as many as I put in."

Stella curled her lip and lifted her eyebrows scornfully. "You
needn't be afraid," she said; "nobody wants one of your old
berries. If you are so particular, it is very easy to separate
them by putting a layer of leaves on top of ours, and yours on
top of that, and then there will be no mixing, and _we_ shall
be sure to get all that belongs to _us_."

Marjorie agreed to this arrangement, being quite ready to have
a supply of water on hand, and so Stella carefully arranged the
berries and said she would carry the bucket herself and that
Marjorie and Alice could take turns in carrying the water. So,
after everything was adjusted, they set off toward the town,
following the dusty road by which they had come.

The way home did not seem as long as the morning's walk, and not
a great deal of time had passed when the spires of the village
churches appeared in the distance, then they reached the outlying
houses, and finally the main street. "I'd just kite up the back way
if I were you," said Stella to Marian; "it is a little bit shorter
and you won't be likely to meet so many people. Good-bye. We turn
off here, you know. I hope you won't get a scolding."

The fear of this, or worse, had been in Marian's heart all along,
though she had not mentioned it, and as she stole in the back gate
and up the garden walk she hoped she would meet neither her
grandmother nor Heppy. The little bucket of blackberries no longer
seemed worth while, and she set it down near the apple tree, ran in
the side door, past her grandfather's study, and on up-stairs,
hoping she could get by the sitting-room without being seen.

But her hopes were in vain, for on the landing appeared her
grandmother. "Is that you, Marian?" she asked. "Where have you been
all day? Come in here and give an account of yourself."

For a second it was in Marian's thought to say that her nose was
bleeding and to make her escape to her room, change her frock and
then reappear, but she knew it was only putting off the evil day,
for the frock's condition would be discovered sooner or later; and
then she was a truthful child, and could not have brought herself to
make a false excuse, even though the outcome might have been better
for her. So she entered the sitting-room timidly and stood with
drooping head before her grandmother.

"Where have you been all day?" repeated her grandmother.

"Oh, didn't Mrs. Hunt tell you?" said Marian in a weak voice. "She
said she would. I've been blackberrying."

"With whom?"

"Some of the girls."

"Who gave you permission?"

"Why--why--Mrs. Hunt didn't think you would mind, and--and----"

"Blackberrying! I should think so," exclaimed Mrs. Otway. "What a
sight you are, all stained and scratched up. Go, wash your face and
hands."

"I did try to get it off at the spring," returned Marian more
cheerfully, hoping she was to be let off rather easily after all.

But she had not reached the door before her grandmother called her
back. "What in the world have you done to your frock?" she asked,
examining her costume in surprise.

"It got torn so and I was so ragged that Stella tore off the skirt,"
said Marian in faint explanation, "and--" she went on, "she thought
she would try to make my petticoat look like a frock; the spots are
blackberry juice; they aren't quite the same color, but we all
thought they looked pretty well, better than slits and snags."

"Then you have ruined not only your frock but your petticoat. Go to
your room and do not come out till I tell you. I will speak to your
grandfather and we will see what is to be done about this," said her
grandmother in such a severe tone that Marian felt like the worst of
criminals and crept to her room in dread distress.

She had not often been seriously punished, but those few times stood
out very clearly just now. Once she had been compelled to receive
ten sharp strokes from a ruler on her outstretched hand. At another
time she had been shut up in a dark closet, and again she had been
tied in a chair for some hours. Any of these was bad enough. The
first was soonest over, but was the most humiliating, the second was
terrifying and nerve racking, while the third tediously long and
hard to bear. For some time the child sat tremblingly listening for
her grandmother's footsteps, but evidently Mrs. Otway did not intend
to use undue haste in the matter. After a while the whistle of the
evening train announced that those who had gone up to the city for
a day's shopping were now returning, and not long after Miss
Dorothy's door opened and Marian could hear the teacher singing
softly to herself in the next room.

A new humiliation filled the child's breast. They would tell Miss
Dorothy, and she would think of her little friend as some one
desperately wicked, too wicked, no doubt, to associate with Patty.
The tears stood in Marian's eyes at this possibility. It was very,
very wrong, of course, to go off without asking leave, and it was
worse to spoil her clothes. She well knew her grandmother's views
upon this subject, and that of all things she disapproved of
wastefulness. She would say that the clothes might have done good to
the poor; they might have been sent in a missionary box to some
needy child, and it was wicked and selfish to deprive the poor of
something that could be of use.

Oh, yes, Marian knew very well all about the probable lecture in
store for her.

She sat dolefully, with clasped hands and tearful eyes. But
presently a happier thought came to her. She would tell Miss
Dorothy before her grandmother had a chance to do so, and
perhaps Miss Dorothy would understand that she had not meant
to do wrong in the first place, and that what came after was
carelessness and not wilful wickedness. She had been ordered
not to leave her room, and this she need not do to carry out
her plan. So she softly crossed the floor and timidly knocked
at the door between Miss Dorothy's room and her own. It was
opened in a moment by her friend, who viewed the forlorn
little figure first with a smile, and then with anxious
interest. "Why, my dearie," she exclaimed, "what is the
matter? Come into my room and tell me what is wrong."

"I can't come in," said Marian in a low tone, "for I mustn't leave
my room till grandma bids me. But you can come in mine, can't you?"
she added wistfully.

"To be sure I can," and suiting the action to the word, Miss Dorothy
entered and sat down by the window, drawing Marian to her side and
saying, "Now tell me all about it."

Marian poured forth her doleful tale, beginning with the visit to
Mrs. Hunt and ending with the interview with her grandmother. "She
wouldn't have minded so much except for the frock and petticoat,"
she said in conclusion, "but when she found out about those, I could
see that she was very, very much put out."

"That was the worst part of it, of course," said Miss Dorothy. "Of
course you told her how sorry you were, and that you were so excited
over getting the biggest berries that you forgot about the briars.
You are not the only one who has done that," she added with a half
smile. "You never had been blackberrying before, had you?"

"No, Miss Dorothy, and it was very exciting. We really had a lovely
time, only the walk was rather a hot one. Mrs. Hunt was so good; she
gave me such a fine lunch. She didn't think grandma would mind, for
she said she often used to go blackberrying when she was a little
girl."

"She said that, did she?"

"Yes, Miss Dorothy. I ought to return the basket, but I can't go
now, and I left the berries down under the apple tree."

"I will go out and bring them in, and I was thinking of going to
Mrs. Hunt's to make a call. I may as well go this evening, and then
I can return the basket for you. Mr. Hunt is one of our trustees,
you know, and I want to see him on a little matter about the
school."

"Oh, thank you, Miss Dorothy. I know she uses that little basket
for all sorts of things, and she might want it."

"She shall have it," said Miss Dorothy. "Well, dear, I hope your
grandmother will not be very hard on you. The only point I can see
that needs blame, is your wearing that flimsy delicate frock, but
as you had never been blackberrying before, you couldn't know the
unkindness of briars."

"There wasn't time to change the frock."

"Yes, I know."

"And you won't think I am very, very, wicked, even if they punish
me? You will let Patty be friends with me?"

"I understand all about it, my dearie, and it shall not make the
slightest difference so far as Patty is concerned. I only wish I
could take your punishment for you."

At this extreme kindness, Marian flung herself upon the floor at
Miss Dorothy's feet and sobbed aloud, "You are so dear! you are so
dear!"

Miss Dorothy lifted her to her lap, smoothed back her hair and
kissed her flushed cheeks. "Cheer up, dear," she said. "One need
not be unhappy forever, and I hope this will soon be all over. Now,
I must go down and get those berries, or it will be too dark to find
them. Don't cry any more," and with a smile Miss Dorothy left her.

It was quite dark when Mrs. Otway at last appeared. "I have talked
it over with your grandfather," she began without preface, "and we
have decided to punish you by having you wear to school all next
week the costume you came home in. That is all we shall do. It will
teach you to be more careful next time. You may come down to supper
now," and Marian meekly followed.

The blackberries were on the table, but Marian could not touch them.
The horror of appearing before her schoolmates in the spotted
petticoat filled her with dismay, and although her grandmother felt
that she had been really very lenient, no punishment she could have
devised would have been more humiliating to the little girl. She had
always been a very dainty child, taking pride in her clothes and
being glad that she could appear as well as any one she knew. How
could she face nineteen pairs of wondering eyes upon Monday morning?
She could see the amused countenances, hear the suppressed giggles,
and imagine the laughing comments whispered with hands hiding
mouths. If only she could fall sick and die so she might never
go to school again.

No one paid much attention to her as she sat there barely tasting
her supper, though she should have been hungry after her long walk
and her early lunch. Miss Dorothy once or twice looked her way and
nodded reassuringly, while Heppy slipped an extra large piece of
cake on her plate as she was passing it around.

But after Marian had gone to bed and was lying forlornly awake,
after an hour of trying to sleep, Miss Dorothy tiptoed into her
room to bend over her, and seeing the wide eyes, to say: "I have
been down to Mrs. Hunt's. She is a dear. Go to sleep, honey. Just
have faith that it will all come out right. Don't worry. I am going
to leave my door open so you will not feel that you are all alone."
And with a kiss she left her to feel somehow quite satisfied that
matters were not so desperate as they seemed, and that Monday's
trial might in some way be set aside if she had faith.




_CHAPTER VI_

_The White Apron_


But Monday morning came and there seemed no prospect of any change
in Mrs. Otway's decision. She came herself to see that Marian was
clad in the costume of disgrace, and she was sternly sent out with
the order not to be late. But lest she should shame Miss Dorothy the
child lingered out of sight around the corner till her teacher
should have passed by and then she ventured down the street by
herself. No one imagined the agony each step cost her, nor how she
avoided any familiar face, crossing and recrossing as she saw an
acquaintance in the distance. She was even about to pass Mrs. Hunt's
gate without looking up when some one called her.

"Marian, Marian," came Mrs. Hunt's pleasant voice. "Stop a minute,
chickadee."

The first impulse was to run on, but that meant reaching the
schoolhouse so much the sooner, so the child hesitated and presently
was captured by Mrs. Hunt, who bore down upon her as one not to be
denied.

"I've been watching for you," she said. "Come right along in. You
have plenty of time. I have something to say to you. There, never
mind, I know the whole story and I ought to have all the blame, for
it was myself that urged you to go. Now your grandma never said you
were not to cover up that ridiculous petticoat, did she? She said
you were to wear it, I know, and wear it you must, of course.

"Now, look here, I have an apron that was my little angel Annie's;
it's a real pretty one, and it is made so it will cover you all up.
I hunted it out this morning early. Put your arms in the sleeves.
That's it. Just as I thought; it covers you well up and hides all
the spots, doesn't it? It is a little yellow from lying, but no
matter, it is clean and smooth. I've two or three more the same
pattern. I always liked 'em with those little frills on the
shoulders.

"Now, never mind, I know just what you're going to say, but you
needn't. I'm taking all the responsibility of this. Just you go
along to school and feel as happy as you can. I'm going to see your
grandmother before you get home, and I'll make it all right with
her, so you are not to bother yourself one little mite. Now trot
along, and hurry a little, or you might be a wee bit late. You can
wear the apron home. You look real nice in it."

Marian started forth as she was bidden, and then overwhelmed by her
sense of relief, she raced back to throw her arms around her good
friend's neck and say, "Oh, you are so good. I do love you, I do.
What should I do without you and Miss Dorothy?"

"Bless her heart," murmured Mrs. Hunt, giving her a hearty hug. She
stood in the doorway, looking after her till she was out of sight.
"I never expected to be so happy in seeing another child wear
anything of my Annie's," she murmured, wiping her eyes as she
entered the house.

The girls were trooping into the schoolroom from the playground
when Marian reached the spot, and Miss Dorothy was already at her
desk. She looked across and gave Marian a bright smile and an
understanding nod as she came in, as much as to say: "What did I
tell you? Hasn't it all come out right?" As hers was not the only
apron worn, Marian did not feel at all oddly dressed, and her relief
was so great that she smiled every time any one looked at her.

Alice sought her out at recess and asked eagerly: "Was your
grandmother awfully mad?"

"She didn't like it," returned Marian evasively.

"What did she do?"

"She didn't do anything. She sent me to my room."

"Was that all? Well, I'm glad you came off so easily," said Alice.
"We all know how particular your grandmother is, and we were afraid
she would do something awfully severe." Then Ruth came up and Marian
went off with her to eat luncheon, so no more was said on the
subject.

"Mrs. Hunt told me I could wear it home," said Marian to herself,
as she went up street from school. She was alone, for Miss Dorothy
had been detained and had told her not to wait. Marian paused at
Mrs. Hunt's gate to see if she were there to give her further
encouragement, for as she was nearing home, the child felt her
spirits oozing. What would her grandmother say? She remembered,
however, that Mrs. Hunt had charged her not to worry, so, finding
all silent and deserted at her friend's house, she plucked up
courage, believing that Mrs. Hunt had not failed her, and that she
was probably at that very moment, closeted with her grandmother.

She was not disappointed, for as she entered the sitting-room she
saw the two having a lively chat. "Here comes the child," cried Mrs.
Hunt cheerily. "We were just talking over old times, Marian. I was
reminding your grandmother of the time we all went nutting to
Jones's lot, and she fell into a mud-hole and was plastered to her
ears. She had to sit in the sun till she dried off, and then I took
her home. My mother rigged her up in some of my clothes, and she
went home with her heart in her mouth." Marian smiled. She
understood the method Mrs. Hunt was taking to smooth matters over
for herself.

"Another time," Mrs. Hunt turned to the other lady, "do you
remember, Maria, when we all went to Perryman's Beach and waded in
the water? You'd had a cold or something, and were afraid your
mother would find out you'd gone with us. She did find out, I
remember, because you didn't dry your feet well, and your bed was
full of sand the next morning. Dear me, dear me, that was a good
while ago, wasn't it?"

Mrs. Otway was smiling with a far-away look in her eyes. "I
remember," she said.

"You can't put old heads on young shoulders," went on Mrs. Hunt,
"and if our mothers had looked ahead and had seen what sober old
matrons we would become, I guess they wouldn't have worried as much
as they did over our little pranks."

Marian edged up to her good friend who put her arm around her. Mrs.
Otway turned her eyes upon her granddaughter. "Where did you get
that apron, Marian?" asked Mrs. Otway, a change coming over her
face.

"I lent it to her," Mrs. Hunt spoke up. "It was my Annie's and I
wasn't going to have Ralph Otway's daughter disgraced by going
through the streets in a petticoat; I'm too fond of him and of her,
too. I remember once how I made my Annie wear a purple frock she
despised. It was the very week before she died," Mrs. Hunt's voice
dropped, "and you can believe, Maria Otway, that if I had it to do
over again, the purple frock would have gone in the fire before she
should ever have worn it. Poor little darling, the girls made fun of
it because it was so ugly and old-womanish. I could have spared her
feelings and I didn't. I have that purple frock now," she went on.
"I kept it to remind me not to hurt the feelings of one of His
little ones when there was no need to." The tears were running down
Mrs. Hunt's cheeks by now, but she went on: "You can think as you
choose, but I have said my say."

"I don't think you would ever hurt any one's feelings if you could
help it, Salome," said Mrs. Otway, melted by the childless woman's
tears. Then turning to Marian, "Run along now, Marian," she said.

"Shall I take off the apron?"

"No, you needn't."

And that was all there was of it, but the next morning before
breakfast said Mrs. Otway outside Marian's door: "You may put on
your blue gingham for school, Marian."

So did Mrs. Hunt triumph and so did Miss Dorothy laugh in her sleeve
when she saw Marian appear in the clean blue frock. It was after
school when she and Marian were coming home together that she
confessed to having had something to do with bringing about this
pleasant state of things. "I went down to Mrs. Hunt's and told her
all about it," she said, "and we hatched up the scheme between us,
so our works and your faith brought about what we wished for. If you
had been really disobedient, and had intended to do wrong we could
not have been so eager to help you, but I think your punishment
exceeded the offense and Mrs. Hunt thought the same. Isn't she a
dear woman, Marian? I feel as if I had known her all my days, and as
if I could go right to her in time of trouble."

"That is the way every one feels," Marian told her. "I stopped there
this morning to take back the apron, and she said she knew Annie was
glad I had worn it. She talks that way about Annie, so I almost feel
as if I knew her and as if she knew me."

"Perhaps she does," returned Miss Dorothy quietly. "Now, when are
you going to send the letter to your father? Don't you think it is
most time you were getting it ready? And, by the way, I have not
shown you my camera. I left it in the city to be put in order and it
came this morning. Now, I was thinking it would be very nice to send
your father a little book of snap pictures of his small daughter. I
will take them, and can develop and print them myself. I have some
gray paper that we can cut into sheets to be folded the proper size
to mount the pictures upon, and it will make a very nice present,
don't you think so?"

"Oh, Miss Dorothy!" Marian's face showed her delight. "I think that
is the very loveliest idea that any one ever thought of. I think you
have an angelic mind for thinking of things."

Miss Dorothy laughed. "I am so glad you are pleased with the idea.
My plan is not to take the pictures all at once, but as I happen to
catch you in a characteristic position, or an artistic one. For
instance, one can be taken at school at your desk, or the
blackboard; another in the garden, another in the sitting-room with
your grandparents, another with Tippy and Dippy."

"More and more lovely," cried Marian. "Then he will feel almost as
if he were here seeing me every day, and will get acquainted with me
so much better in that way. I don't feel as if my father and I were
very well acquainted."

"You poor little pet, of course you don't, but once you begin
sending letters back and forth it will be quite different."

"Yes, I think so, too. Miss Dorothy, do you suppose my father will
ever come home?"

"I don't know why he shouldn't."

"I do; it is because grandpa will not ask him to. I think grandma
would like to, but grandpa won't let her; that is what I think, and
I believe Mrs. Hunt thinks so, too."

Miss Dorothy was silent for a moment, then she said: "Perhaps we'd
better not talk about it, dear, for I don't know the circumstances,
and I might not judge correctly, but if it is right that he should
come, I think your writing to him will be the surest way of bringing
it about the sooner. Shall we write the letter this afternoon?"

"Oh, please."

"Then come to my room in about an hour and we'll try it."

Marian was promptly on hand when the hour arrived, and seated
herself in a great twitter before the machine. She began bravely
enough: "My dear father," and then she paused, but slowly went on
till she had completed half a page of typewritten words. Miss
Dorothy did not offer any suggestions, but sat at the other side of
the room before her writing-table. At the pause in the clicking of
the typewriter she looked up. "Well," she said, "you haven't
finished yet, have you?"

"I don't know," responded Marian doubtfully. "Would you mind looking
at what I have done?"

Miss Dorothy came over and read the few stiff lines:

"My dear father: I have learned to write upon the typewriter which
belongs to my teacher. I hope you are well. I am well and so are the
rest of the family. We have very pleasant warm weather at present. I
hope you have the same in Berlin. I thought you might be pleased to
receive a letter from me, although it is not the first of the year.
I go to school now. There are twenty pupils in our room. They are
all little girls."

"Oh, dear, dear," exclaimed Miss Dorothy, "is that the way you feel
when you are writing? Why, you are talking to your father,
remember. Just listen to the way I write to mine." She read from the
sheet she held in her hand:

"Dear old daddy: Isn't this gorgeous weather? I wish you and I were
off for a real old time tramp this afternoon. How we would talk and
turn our hearts inside out to each other. I can see you with your
eyes twinkling under that disreputable old hat of yours, and I can
feel your polite hand under my independent elbow when there is a
stream to jump or a wall to climb, the dear hand that I never need
for that sort of help, but which you pretend I do because I am your
girl still, if I am big enough to face the world by myself.

"Well, daddy, I have been teaching for more than a week, and haven't
had one cry over it. Isn't that courage for you? Not that my pupils
are all angels, oh, no, this is not heaven, dear dad, but it is
really a very nice place, and there are some dear people here.

"Did you ever happen to meet a Mr. William Hunt and his wife? He is
a very good sort, and she is a perfect darling, one of those rare
flowers whose fragrance fills the air even on the highway; not one
of the hothouse kind that has been forced to bloom out of season,
for out of season and in season she is always blooming and shedding
forth her sweetness." Miss Dorothy paused.

"Oh, but Miss Dorothy, I could never write like that," exclaimed
Marian in an awe-stricken tone.

"Perhaps not just like that, but you can tell him about yourself and
about the people you know, Mrs. Hunt, for instance, and your
schoolmates, and Tippy and Dippy."

"And you?"

"Yes, and me, if you like."

"Oh, very well, I will try again. I didn't know we ought to write
letters like that."

"That is the very kind we should write. I will finish mine while you
do yours." So for the next few minutes the tapping of the typewriter
drowned the scratching of Miss Dorothy's pen, which flew steadily
over her paper.

At last Miss Dorothy looked up. "There," she exclaimed, "I have
finished mine. How are you getting on?"

"Oh, much better. I have written ever so much. I am almost at the
bottom of the page, and I think you will have to put another sheet
in for me, if you will be so good."

"I'll do it with pleasure. May I see what you have written, or would
you rather not?"

"Oh, please look. I have told him about school and about you and
some of the girls. There is a great deal more I could say, but I
will leave out Tippy and Dippy this time."

Miss Dorothy read down the page and at the end she stooped and
kissed the child. "You have paid me a lovely compliment, dear," she
said. "I am glad you feel that way," for Marian had written: "We
have the loveliest teacher in the world. Her name is Miss Dorothy
Robbins. She is like Mrs. Hunt, but can understand little girls
better, for she is younger and prettier. I love her very much."

At last the letter was finished, folded and addressed, and Miss
Dorothy promised to mail it herself. It had been a great undertaking
for Marian, who was quite tired out by her afternoon's work, but who
was very happy now that it was done, for the very act drew her
nearer her father.

She went down that same evening to tell Mrs. Hunt about it. There
was neither baking nor pickling going on this time, but she found
her friend in her sitting-room, a basket of mending by her side.
"You are always busy, aren't you, Auntie Hunt?" said Marian. Mrs.
Hunt was called Auntie, by many of her friends.

"Yes, dear, I think most busy people are happy, and I am sure all
happy people are busy about something. Well, how goes it up at the
brick house?"

"Oh, very well, indeed. What do you think I have been doing to-day?"

"Can't guess. There is one thing I know you have not been doing.
I'll wager a sixpence you've not been blackberrying," and Mrs. Hunt
laughed.

The color flew into Marian's face. "No, indeed, I haven't been, and
I shall not probably ever go again until I'm a grown lady, and can
do as I please."

"Do you think all grown-ups do as they please?"

"Why, don't they?"

"Not a bit of it. But there, tell me what is the wonderful thing you
have been doing?"

"I have written a letter to papa all by myself, and Miss Dorothy has
mailed it. She put the stamp on and took it to the post-office just
now with her letters."

"Well, well, well, but won't he be pleased to get it? That's a fine
young woman, that Miss Dorothy of yours."

"Isn't she?"

"She is so. She made us a nice visit the other evening. She is a
girl after my own heart, none of your vain, self-absorbed young
persons, always concerned in her own affairs, but one of the real
hearty kind that thinks of others as well as herself, and has her
eyes open to what is best in life. I like her."

"And she likes you."

"I'm glad to hear it."

"I wish you could see the kind of letters she writes to her father,
but then," Marian added thoughtfully, "he must be the kind of father
it is easy to write that way to."

"I'll be bound he is the right kind to have a daughter like that.
She has no mother, she tells me. Her aunt keeps house for them, and
there is quite a family of children."

"Yes, and Patty is the youngest. She is going to write to me."

"Bless me, how you are blossoming out into a correspondent. Well,
don't let it take up so much of your time that you won't be able to
drop in as often as usual. There is a little basket of grapes in the
pantry; you can take it to your grandma; the pear on top grew for
you to eat right now."

Marian needed no second hint, but sought out the fruit and was not
long in burying her teeth in the yellow juicy pear, and then because
it grew dark early, she hurried away that she might be home "before
the dark catches you," said Mrs. Hunt.




_CHAPTER VII_

_Patty's Letter_


One day a few weeks later Marian ran to Miss Dorothy with a letter
her grandfather had just brought in, and when her teacher opened it,
she saw her smile as she drew a sheet from within the longer letter.
"This is for you, Marian," said Miss Dorothy.

"It is from Patty, I know," cried Marian delightedly, and she took
the long-wished for letter over to the window while Miss Dorothy
turned her attention to her own home news.

Patty's was a nice cordial little note which told about her lessons
and her friends, and which said that she hoped Marian and she would
soon meet and be very chummy. "I know I shall like you," wrote
Patty, "because Dolly says so, and Dolly is nearly always right."

"I think so, too," said Marian aloud. She took much longer to read
her letter than Miss Dorothy did to read hers, for she was not very
expert in reading written pages. Miss Dorothy had laid down the
closely written sheets which she had been holding, and was looking
out of the window thoughtfully when Marian at last came to "Your
affectionate friend, Patty Robbins."

"It was such a nice letter," she said looking up with a pleased
sigh.

"I am very glad you found it so," returned Miss Dorothy with a
smile.

"Was yours a nice one?"

"Yes, it is from my father, and he always writes delightful letters.
I hope to see him and Patty both on Saturday. Dad has some business
in the city, and Patty needs a new coat, so he is going to take her
with him. I am to meet them there, for poor dad would never know how
to buy a coat. Do you often go to the city, Marian?"

"I never have been but once."

"Really? I was just thinking how nice it would be if you could go
with me and meet Patty; then we three could go shopping and have
lunch somewhere together."

"Oh, Miss Dorothy!" Such a plan was beyond Marian's wildest dreams.
She looked radiant for a moment, then her face fell.

"What is the matter?" asked Miss Dorothy.

"I am afraid grandma will not let me go. I never have been but that
once, and then grandma had to go to the dentist; grandpa could not
go with her and didn't want her to go alone."

"But what about your clothes and things? Don't you have to go there
for them?"

"Grandma never gets me ready-mades. Miss Almira Belt makes
everything I wear. Do you suppose she always will do it?"

"I hope not," returned Miss Dorothy gravely, then she laughed as she
pictured a grown-up Marian arrayed in frocks of Miss Almira's make.
They did very well for a little girl, for they were of good material
and neatly made, if old-fashioned in cut.

"Do you think grandma would let me go?" asked Marian, a faint hope
dawning within her.

"I shall find out."

"Oh, Miss Dorothy, are you really going to ask her?"

"I certainly am."

"But I am afraid she will say it is too expensive. She doesn't
believe in spending money in that way on little girls. She allows me
to go to church fairs and such things when they are for a good
cause, but she says journeying is not necessary, that it excites me
and I am better off at home."

"But you would really like to go," said Miss Dorothy disregarding
this last speech.

"It would be the most beautifullest thing that ever happened to me."

"Such a small pleasure," said Miss Dorothy half to herself. "Well,
dear, if it is only a question of expense, that shall not stand in
the way, I promise you. Fifty cents or so would do it, and that is
not a large sum."

Here Marian took alarm. "But, Miss Dorothy, you mustn't pay for me.
You must keep your money for Patty and the others. You mustn't spend
it on me."

"Mustn't I?" Miss Dorothy looked over at her with a little knowing
smile. "Then I won't do it since you are so particular, but I have a
scheme of my own and we shall see how it will work out. Are you
willing to earn it?"

"Indeed I am; I should like it above all things. I never earned any
money for myself, but I have earned some for the heathen."

Miss Dorothy made a little grimace. "Very well, if you are willing
to earn your way, you may consider yourself invited to make the
journey at your own expense. I guarantee sufficient work to pay for
your ticket. I don't suppose you will object to being paid in
advance."

Marian looked doubtful. "Well--if----"

"If--if----What an ifer you are. I don't mean all in advance, only a
part. Do you agree to that?"

"I don't suppose it would be wrong to agree to that."

"You must have a Puritan conscience," said Miss Dorothy laughing.

"What is that?"

"It is something that is very unhealthy sometimes. I will see that
you begin your work to-morrow."

"Do please tell me now what it is."

"No, no, you might back out," Miss Dorothy laughed. "I'll tell you
when the time comes. In the meantime your grandma's consent must be
had. Perhaps I'd better settle it at once. Will you go with me to
ask her?"

Marian hung back. "Oh, if you don't mind," she said, "I'd rather
not."

"You're no kind of a soldier. See me walk up to the cannon's mouth."
And leaving the room, Miss Dorothy ran lightly down-stairs.

Marian followed slowly, but though she hesitated at the sitting-room
door where she heard voices, she did not tarry, but went on down to
the lower floor and into the garden where Tippy and Dippy lay asleep
in the sunshine. Dippy opened one eye and stretched himself as
Marian approached. She picked him up and carried him down to the
apple tree.

"I've had a letter from Patty," she told him when she was settled in
the crotch of the tree, "and maybe,--it is only maybe,--Dippy, I am
going to the city on Saturday. I don't suppose you would care
anything about it. I am sure you would much rather stay here and
chase grasshoppers, but I want to go so powerfully that I think I
shall cry my eyes out if grandma says I can't. I know she wouldn't
consent if I asked her, but maybe she will if Miss Dorothy does."
She sat still cuddling Dippy who had fallen asleep again. From her
point of vantage she could look up and down the street. She had
learned not to expect to move the mountain, but the mustard seeds
were again in her mind.

Presently she saw Miss Dorothy come out the front door and turn down
the street. She crept along the limb on which she sat, leaving Dippy
to look out for himself, and gained the wall from which she could
look directly down upon the pavement. She must ask Miss Dorothy what
success she had had. "Miss Dorothy, Miss Dorothy," she called softly
when her teacher came near. Miss Dorothy looked up. "What did she
say?" asked Marian.

"She hasn't said yes yet," replied Miss Dorothy. "What are you doing
up there?"

"Oh, just nothing but looking around and thinking, about the mustard
seed, you know."

"Oh, yes. Very well, I'm about to do the works, so you stay there
and exercise the faith, and perhaps between us we'll manage to get
this settled to our satisfaction."

"Where are you going?" asked Marian as Miss Dorothy walked on.

"To attend to the works," called back Miss Dorothy mysteriously.
"Faith and works, you know."

Marian crawled back again to the crotch of the tree. Dippy had
jumped down, not being pleased at having his nap disturbed, so
Marian did not go after him but sat looking off at the mountain. "I
want to go, oh, Lord, I do want to go," she said wistfully, "and I
believe you will let Miss Dorothy manage it, yes, I do." She sat
with her eyes fixed upon the mountain for some time, then she gave a
long sigh, and changed her position. "I believe I'll go get Patty's
letter and read it over again," she said, beginning to climb down
the tree.

In a little while she was back again in her old place, letter in
hand. She had finished reading it and was looking off down street
watching for Miss Dorothy's return when she saw Mrs. Hunt entering
the front door; she had come down street this time, instead of up.
"She's come to see grandma, I suppose," said Marian. Then a thought
flashed across her mind; she wondered if Miss Dorothy's works had
anything to do with Mrs. Hunt's coming. To be sure Miss Dorothy was
not with her, but neither had she been that other time when Mrs.
Hunt had managed so well about the apron. Marian could not resist
the temptation of going in to hear what her grandmother and Mrs.
Hunt were talking about. She paused at the door of the sitting-room.
Mrs. Hunt sat rocking in one of the haircloth rockers, Mrs. Otway in
the other.

"Yes," Mrs. Hunt was saying, "Dr. Grimes says she's not likely to be
about again soon if she gets over it."

Mrs. Otway looked very grave. "I'm sorry for more reasons than one.
Marian needs a new coat, and I had counted on Almira's making it."

It was Miss Belt, then, of whom they were talking. Marian crept
softly in and sat down in a corner where she could hear more.

"They think she got it up there at Billing's," Mrs. Hunt went on.
"She was sewing there a while ago, and Dr. Grimes says the water on
that place isn't fit to drink; they ought to boil it. Like as not
that is where she did get it. Typhoid is pretty slow, but she has a
good nurse in Hannah, and I don't doubt she'll pull through. Is that
you, Marian? Come here, honey."

Marian went to her old friend. "I was telling about Almira Belt's
being down with typhoid," said Mrs. Hunt.

"Oh, isn't that too bad?" Marian's sympathies were real. She liked
Miss Almira, though she didn't enjoy having her cold scissors
snipping around her shoulders, and her bony fingers poking at her
when she stood up to be fitted.

"It is too bad," returned Mrs. Hunt, "for her work has to lie by;
there's no one else to do it, for her sister Hannah has her hands
full."

"I'm truly sorry," said Mrs. Otway shaking her head, "with the
winter coming I am afraid it will go hard with them."

"Yes, winter isn't far off," said Mrs. Hunt. "William says he thinks
we'll have early snow. We'll all have to keep the Belts in mind, and
I guess they'll not suffer. Well, I must be going. I thought you'd
want to hear about Almira; you're always so ready to look out for
the sick, Maria."

"I certainly shall not let Almira want for anything I can do,"
returned Mrs. Otway with emphasis. "She has been a good and faithful
worker all her days, and I hope her years of usefulness are not
ended yet. Thank you for coming to tell us, Salome."

"Well, I knew you'd want to know," repeated Mrs. Hunt. "By the way,
Maria, I hear Miss Robbins is going to town on Saturday, and I
shouldn't wonder if there'd be something to get for Almira. I don't
doubt Miss Robbins would attend to it."

"I am sure she would," returned Mrs. Otway. "She is always very
ready to offer her services."

"You like her right well, don't you?" said Mrs. Hunt.

"Very much indeed; we are glad to have her with us."

"That's what I surmised. What was I going to say? Oh, yes, you were
remarking that Marian needed a winter coat, and she will need it,
cold as it is growing, for I remember you sent her last year's one
in the missionary box. Why not let Miss Robbins get one for her in
the city? Marian could go along, and she'd be glad of her company.
It wouldn't be much trouble if the child were there to fit it on.
You could tell her the kind you wanted, and I'll venture to say
you'd pay less than for the cloth and making."

"Perhaps that would be a good plan," replied Mrs. Otway, as if it
had not been presented before. "I'll see about it when Miss Dorothy
comes in."

"Oh, may I go?" Marian breathed softly, but at that moment the
door was shut after Mrs. Hunt, and her grandmother did not hear
the question, which was just as well, as Marian on second thoughts
decided, for if she thought the child wanted to go for a frolic she
might withhold her consent. So Marian wisely held her tongue and
went out to the garden again.

No more was said upon the subject until the next day and Marian was
afraid it was forgotten, but in the afternoon Miss Dorothy called
her. "Come in here, young woman, and earn your trip to town."

Marian obeyed with alacrity. Miss Dorothy was seated before her
typewriter. "Come here and I will show you what you have to do," she
said. "You are to make twenty copies of this little slip. You must
make as many as you can upon one sheet of paper, about so far apart.
You know now perfectly well how to put in the paper and how to take
it out. To-morrow you can make twenty slips more, twenty the day
after, making sixty slips in all; you will be paid half a cent for
each slip, and eventually you will earn sixty cents, just what a
round trip ticket costs. Do you agree?"

"Oh, Miss Dorothy, of course, if you are sure I can do it."

"Of course you can do it, at first slowly, and then, as they are to
be all alike, you will be able to do the last with your eyes shut.
Now, I'll leave you to go ahead."

"Please----"

"Please what?"

"Wait till I have done one to see if it is all right."

"Very well, that is a small favor to grant."

"And, tell me, am I really to go?"

"The powers that be, have so decreed."

"And I can pay my own way?"

"Yes, that is one of the reasons. Your very wise and astute teacher
remarked that it would teach you self-reliance and independence,
help to make you resourceful, broaden your experiences. Oh, me! what
didn't she argue?"

Marian turned adoring eyes upon her. "And Mrs. Hunt?" she said.

"Did you think she had something to do with it? Well, she did
without knowing it, for I was on my way to her house when she came
here with the news of Miss Almira's illness, and all unconsciously
she did us a good turn by suggesting that you go up to the city with
me to get a coat. Wasn't it funny that it should happen that way? I
didn't mean about poor Miss Almira; that is anything but funny, but
it is strange that Mrs. Hunt should have come around with a piece of
news that settled the whole matter. When your grandma told me you
were to go, I came near laughing outright, but when I knew the
reason I did look concerned, I hope. She said she had been thinking
over the matter of your going to the city with me. Would it be too
great a task, and would I have time to select a coat for you? No, I
said it would be no task at all, for I should be doing the same for
my little sister.

"Here I ran against a snag, for your grandmother said that perhaps I
could get yours without your being there, for my little sister could
be your proxy. 'Oh, but,' I said, 'Patty is short and chubby while
Marian is tall and slender. I am afraid I could never select the
proper garment unless she were there to try it on.' 'But the
expense,' said grandma. 'Sixty cents would do much good in some
other direction.' 'Perhaps,' I said, 'I can get a coat for less than
the price you have fixed upon, if I get the two together.' She
wasn't so sure of that. Then I said, 'I have a little work that I
promised a friend of mine to do for her, typewritten slips, which
Marian could do perfectly. If I go to the city on Saturday I cannot
get them all done as promptly as they should be, but if Marian could
help me, I could share the pay and she could then make her own
expenses.' At this grandma succumbed, and so, my dear, we are going.
Now, I must go, for you will never do twenty slips before dark if I
stand talking. That looks very well. Keep on as you have begun and
you have nothing to fear."

Left to herself Marian tapped away industriously till just as it was
getting too dark to see, she finished her twenty slips and proudly
showed them to Miss Dorothy when she came in. The first money she
had ever really earned was placed in her hand.

"If you don't get your entire sixty done this week," said Miss
Dorothy, "you can hitch some of them on to next week's number, for
we agreed to square this matter. So you needn't go to town with the
feeling that you haven't earned the trip, whatever happens."

Marian smiled back her reply and ran down to show her precious dime
to her grandfather. He actually patted her on the head and called
her a good child while her grandmother looked over her spectacles
and nodded approval.

The next day the second twenty slips were finished, but the third
day only ten were done as Miss Dorothy had to use her typewriter for
some school work, yet with only ten remaining of the first sixty,
Marian felt that she had no right to feel aggrieved, especially as
it had become very easy work. So it was a very happy little girl who
went to sleep Friday night to dream of the next day's pleasures.




_CHAPTER VIII_

_A Trip to Town_


The morning dawned bright and fair, a little cool, to be sure, but
so much the better, thought Marian, for now grandma will be all the
more ready for me to get my coat. The leaves danced in red, yellow
and brown array, along the side-walk as Marian and Miss Dorothy
stepped out of the house to take the early train. It was such an
important occasion that Marian felt as if every one must be
wondering where she was going so early, dressed in her best. But no
one took any special notice of her except one of the schoolgirls
whom she happened to meet, and who said: "Are you going to town,
Marian?"

"Yes, Miss Dorothy and I are going shopping," returned Marian with
beaming face.

"I thought you must be going; you're so dressed up," returned the
child, and Marian smiled up at her companion with an air of
conscious delight. Everything was so interesting; the starting of
the train, the movements of their fellow passengers, the outlook
from the car windows, the masses of red and yellow foliage which
meant forests, the brown bare spaces which were fields, the little
isolated houses, the small villages stretching away from the
stations. There was not one moment of the journey when Marian was
not entertained by what she saw along the way.

At last they reached the city and such a noise and confusion as met
their ears, made Marian cling to Miss Dorothy. "Is it always like
this?" she asked.

"Like this? How?"

"So noisy and crowded and everybody rushing about in such a hurry."

"Yes, I think it is. We notice it more, coming from our quiet little
village. This is the car we take. We are to meet Patty at the
library. Father has to go there to look up some references, and it
seemed the best place to meet. Have you ever been there, Marian?"

"No, I never have."

"Then it will be something for you to see. A good library is a good
lesson in many directions."

But Marian's eyes were not taking in rows of books or library
appointments when they reached the reading-room. She was searching
for a dark-haired, rosy-faced, plump little girl who should answer
to the name of Patty. "I believe there she is," she whispered to
Miss Dorothy, and nodded toward a corner where sat two whom Marian
decided must be those they were looking for.

"Why, so it is," returned Miss Dorothy. "The idea of your seeing
them first. How did you know them?"

"From the photographs you showed me, and from what you told me about
them."

Patty had been on the lookout, too, and spied them at once. She
hurried forward, threw her arms around her sister and gave her a
fervent hug, then she turned to Marian. "I am so glad you could
come," she said heartily. "I was so afraid maybe you couldn't and
I did so want us to be together to-day."

"Dad is so absorbed he hasn't seen us yet," said Miss Dorothy,
making her way to the corner where her father sat. "I wonder if I
can steal up behind him and take him unawares." She had almost
reached him when he caught sight of her. Down went the book, he
jumped up and had her in his arms in a minute. "Come, come," he
said, "let us get out where we don't have to whisper. I'll come back
later," and he hurried them into the corridor where they could speak
freely. He was not a very tall man, but was broad-shouldered and a
little inclined to be stout. "Now," he said with a pleasant smile at
Marian, "I am willing to bet a cookie, that I can tell who this is.
You look like your father, my dear. I knew him very well when I was
younger, for I will venture to say you are a Miss Somebody Otway."

"Her name is Marian," said Patty, "and we are going to be great
friends."

"You are? Isn't it early in the day to make such predictions?" said
Mr. Robbins.

"No." Patty shook her head. "I knew the minute I saw her that we
were going to be. I like her, don't you, daddy?"

"If she is as nice as she looks, I do," was the reply, and Marian
felt much pleased at being made of such consequence. She was not
used to being noticed and these friendly people pleased her. She
wondered if her father would be as cheery, and as affectionately
disposed as Mr. Robbins. She would ask this pleasant man about her
father some day when they were better acquainted.

"Now, let me see, what is the programme?" said Mr. Robbins to his
elder daughter.

"We three females are going shopping. I am to buy Patty a coat. Is
there anything else I am to get for the family?"

"Dear me, yes. I have a long list that your Aunt Barbara gave me;
she said you would know. I have it somewhere about me." He felt in
his pockets and presently brought out the list which Miss Dorothy
looked over.

"Oh, these will not be much trouble," she assured him. "They are all
little things. I can easily see to them all."

"That is good; I am glad to have that responsibility removed," said
her father. "You will want some money, I suppose."

"Yes, but not very much," Miss Dorothy smiled encouragingly. She
knew too well the many demands upon that none-too-well-filled
pocketbook, and when her father took out a roll of bills and handed
them to her she gave some back to him. "I shall not need all that,"
she told him. "Patty's coat is the only really expensive thing I
shall have to get."

"Very well, then," said her father, "but you must be sure to have
enough. Now, where shall we meet for lunch?"

"Oh, are we all to lunch together?" said Miss Dorothy in a pleased
voice. "Suppose we go to Griffin's; it is a nice quiet place."

"What time?"

"About one, I think."

"All right, one sharp, then. Sure you've enough money?"

Miss Dorothy nodded. "Quite enough. Dear dad," she said as he moved
off, "he is so generous. I don't believe he has a mean bone in his
body."

This set Marian to wondering if one had a mean bone which it would
be; she thought possibly an elbow; they could be so sharp, but
before she had settled the question Patty began to talk to her and
they were then so busy getting acquainted that there was no time to
think of mean bones or anything else but themselves.

It was a most delightful experience to go around the big shops, and
look at the pretty things. Patty had such a pleasant way of making
believe which added to the fun. "Now you say what you are going to
buy," she began, "and I'll say what I am. I think I'd like that
pretty shiny, pinky silk hanging up there."

Marian looked at her in amazement. "Oh, have you enough money to buy
that?" she asked in surprise.

Patty laughed. "Not really, I am just pretending I have."

"Oh," Marian's face cleared. "I'd like to pretend, too. Are you
going to buy it for yourself?"

"Dear me, no. I am going to get it for Dolly; she would look dear in
a frock of it. I shall not get much for myself. It's much more fun
to get for other people, for they don't know it and it doesn't make
them feel bad if they don't get the things. When I get things for
myself, sometimes I am a little wee bit disappointed because I am
only make-believing. I think Dick would like one of those neckties,
the red one, I think."

Marian felt suddenly very poverty-stricken; there were no Dollies
or Dicks for her to buy make-believes for. She sighingly mentioned
the fact to Patty.

"Oh, that doesn't make any difference," said Patty cheerfully; "you
can buy for some one else. I think I'll get you that Roman sash."

"Oh, lovely, and I'll get you the blue one. Would you like it?"

"I'd love it."

"I might get Miss Dorothy one of those pretty lacey things in the
case."

"That would be fine; she'd be so pleased." Patty spoke so exactly
as if Marian really intended to buy it, that the latter laughed
outright. Patty was really great fun.

"I'll get something for dear Mrs. Hunt," Marian went on.

"Oh, do. I know about her. Dolly wrote us how kind she was to her.
She must be awfully nice."

Marian overlooked the "awfully." She was not going to criticise
anything about Patty if she could help it. "I think I ought to get
something for poor Miss Almira," she went on. "It is because she is
so ill and couldn't make my coat that I could come to-day. What do
you think would be nice for her, Patty?"

Patty's eyes roved around the big store. "See, those soft-looking
wrappers hanging up way over there? I think one of those would be
just the thing for a sick person. Let's go look at them and pick
one out. We'll tell Dolly we are going. She will be at that counter
for some time."

They left Miss Dorothy while they went upon their interesting errand
of selecting a proper robe for Miss Almira. They decided upon one of
lavender and white, and then they returned to find that Miss Dorothy
had finished making her uninteresting purchases of tapes, thread and
the like, so they went to another floor to look at coats. Marian's
was chosen first and Patty was so pleased with it that she begged to
have one like it, "If Marian doesn't mind," she said.

Marian did not in the least mind, in fact she would be delighted to
know that she and Patty had coats alike, for then they could think
of one another whenever they put them on. So one as near like
Marian's as possible was selected for Patty, and then they went to a
place Patty had been talking of all morning. This was an exhibition
of moving pictures which Patty doted upon and which Miss Dorothy,
herself, confessed she dearly liked. To Marian it was like exploring
a new country, and she was filled with awe and delight, so they
remained till the last minute and had to hurry in order to reach
Griffin's by one o'clock.

Mr. Robbins was there, watch in hand. "Ten minutes late," he cried.

"It was that funny man trying to get his hat that kept us," declared
Patty. "We had to see the end."

"She means the moving pictures," Miss Dorothy explained. "We were so
absorbed we didn't realize how the time was going."

"Oh, well, well, never mind," said Mr. Robbins good-naturedly. "I
have ordered lunch and we'll go eat it."

"Good!" exclaimed Patty. "I always like what dad orders much better
than what I get myself. What did you get, daddy dear?"

"Beefsteak and French fried potatoes, hot rolls, chocolate for you
ladies, coffee for myself. Would you like a salad, Dolly? We can
have some ice-cream and cake, or whatever sweet you like, later."

Miss Dorothy declined the salad for them all, and her father led
the way to a table near the windows where one could look out upon
the street or in upon the room in which they were sitting. It was
all very exciting and unusual to Marian who had never enjoyed
such a high event in all her life as lunching at a restaurant with
grown-ups. Everything was a matter of curiosity and pleasure from
the garnished dish of beefsteak to the chocolate with whipped cream
on top. The shining mirrors, the dextrous waiters, the music played
by an orchestra, seated behind tall palms, made the place appear
like fairy-land to the little village girl. "I'd like to do this
every day," she confided to Patty.

"So should I," agreed Patty.

"No, you wouldn't," put in Mr. Robbins overhearing them. "You'd grow
so tired of it that you would long for plain bread and butter in
your own home. Nothing palls upon one so much as having to dine at
a restaurant every day. I have tried it and I know."

Marian could scarcely believe this possible, but she supposed that
such things appeared very different to men, and she was sure that it
would be many, many years before she would grow tired of it. After
luncheon there came more shopping, and the time arrived all too soon
when they must start for home. At parting Patty slipped a little
package into Marian's hand. "It's for you," she whispered. "It isn't
the Roman sash, but I hope you will like it. Dolly is going to ask
your grandma if she can't bring you to make us a visit some day."

"How I should love to do that," was the fervent answer. Marian felt
very badly that she had nothing to give Patty in return for her
gift. "If you were a heathen," she said gravely, "I might have
something to give you, too. I hope grandma will let me make the
visit. I mean to think of the mustard seed very hard and maybe she
will let me." Then before she could explain this strange speech to
the puzzled Patty, Mr. Robbins said they must hurry to the train,
and she had to leave Patty on the platform waiting till her train
should be called, and wondering what sort of girl Marian could be
to say such very unusual things.

Marian waited till the train was fairly under way before she opened
the package Patty had given her. She found it contained a little
doll. On a piece of paper was scribbled: "You said you didn't have
any little dolls, so I got you this one. It cost only five cents. I
hope you will think of me when you play with it." The doll was one
which Marian had admired in the Five Cent store, and which she had
wished she could buy. "I don't see when she got it," she said to
Miss Dorothy, turning the doll around admiringly.

"Don't you remember when you ran to the door to listen to the street
band that was playing outside?"

"Oh, yes. Was it then?"

"It was then. Patty was so pleased to get it so secretly."

"I shall call it Patty," said Marian. "I shall love her very much;
she is so cunning and little, and I can do all sorts of things with
her that I can't do with my big doll." This tiny Patty was company
all the way home, and in a measure took the place of her lively
namesake. Marian had been obliged to rely upon her own invention and
imagination so much in her little life, which had lacked childish
comrades, that she could amuse herself very well alone or with
slight things.

Miss Dorothy watched her as she murmured to the wee Patty and at
last she said: "Have you had a good day, girlie?"

Marian cuddled up to her in the familiar way she had seen Patty do.
"Oh, it has been a wonderful day, and I am so thankful for Patty,"
she said.

"Big Patty or this little one?" Miss Dorothy touched the doll with
her gloved finger.

"For both. There is so much that is pleasant in the world, isn't
there? Every little while something comes along that you never knew
about before and it makes you glad. First you came, then there was
school and the girls, and to-day came Patty and your father. He
makes me feel very differently about fathers."

"He is a dear dad," said Miss Dorothy lovingly.

"Do you think mine will be like him? I've always thought of him as
being like grandpa, not that grandpa isn't very nice," she added
quickly, "but he doesn't think much about little girls, and never
says funny jokey things to them as your father does. He never seems
to notice the things I do, and your father talks to Patty about the
little, little things I never knew grown up men were interested in."

"That's because he has to be father and mother, too. Our mother died
when Patty was a baby, you know. Yes, daddy is a darling."

"I hope mine will be," said Marian earnestly. "I haven't any mother
either, so perhaps he will feel like being father and mother, too. I
wonder when I shall see him. I didn't use to think much about it,
but since I have written to him, and all that, I think much more
about him."

"That is perfectly natural, and I have no doubt but that when he
finds out that you want to see him he will want to see you, and he
will be crossing the ocean the first thing we know."

"Oh, do you really think so?"

"I shouldn't be at all surprised, only you mustn't count too much on
it. We must be getting those photographs ready pretty soon."

"I would like one of Patty and me together, I mean Patty Robbins,
this is Patty Otway," and she held out her doll.

"We'll see if that can be arranged."

"How can it when we don't live in the same place?"

"I have a little plan that I cannot tell you yet. If it works out
all right I will let you know."

"Oh, Miss Dorothy, you are always making such lovely plans. What did
I ever do without you? Has the plan anything to do with my going to
visit Patty some time?"

"Maybe it has and maybe it hasn't. But, dear me, we are slowing up
for Greenville. We must not be carried on to the next station. Have
we all the things? Where is the umbrella? Oh, you have it. All
right. I hope Heppy will give us hot cakes for supper, don't you?"
So saying she led the way from the train and in a few minutes they
were making their way up the familiar street which, strange to say,
had not altered in the least since morning, although Marian felt
that she had been away so long something must surely have happened
meanwhile.




_CHAPTER IX_

_A Visit to Patty_


After all it was not so very long before Marian and Patty met again,
for a little cough which developed soon after the trip to town in
course of time grew worse, and in course of time the family doctor
announced that Marian had whooping-cough. Mrs. Otway was aghast. She
had a horror of contagious diseases and kept Marian at a distance.
"She must not go to school," she said to Miss Dorothy, "for the
other children might take it."

This was a great blow to Marian, for it meant not only staying away
from school, but from her schoolmates upon whom she had begun to
depend, so it was a very sorrowful face that she wore all that day,
and time hung heavily upon her hands. She wandered up-stairs and
down, wishing for the hour to come when Miss Dorothy would return.
Finally she went out to the garden, for her grandmother had told
her to keep in the open air as much as possible, and it was still
pleasant in the sunshine. "I don't suppose Dippy and Tippy will
get the whooping-cough if I play with them," she remarked to
Heppy, feeling that if these playmates failed her she would be
desolate indeed.

Heppy laughed. "They're not likely to," she said, "though I have
known plenty of cats to have coughs, and I have known of their
having pneumony, but I guess you can risk it."

So Marian and the cats spent the morning in the garden and it was
there Miss Dorothy found them when she came in to dinner. She had an
open letter in her hand which she waved as she walked toward Marian.
"What do you think?" she said. "Patty has the whooping-cough, too,
though not very badly. Your grandmother was right when she said you
probably got it the day we all went shopping."

"Oh, poor Patty! I wish she were here with me."

"And she wishes you were there with her. She is going to have
lessons at home for a little while each day, and I think it would be
a good thing if you could have them together. In fact, it struck me
as such a good plan that I have spoken to your grandmother about it.
Your grandfather has taken up some work this winter which will keep
him very busy, and he could not give you any time. I would be glad
to, but my work grows more and more absorbing and your grandparents
will not listen to my teaching you out of school hours, so as it
seems a pity for you to lose all these weeks, I proposed that you
should go to our house to keep Patty company. You will not have to
study so very hard, for the whooping-cough must have plenty of
outdoor air, and it would not do for you to be cooped many hours
a day. What do you think of it?"

For a moment Marian looked pleased, then her face fell. "I should
miss you so," she said.

"You dear child," returned Miss Dorothy, drawing her close. "So
should I miss you, but I think I can arrange to come home every
week now. It will mean very early rising on Monday morning in
order to get here in time for school, but I can manage it, and
I shall be able to reach home by six on Friday afternoon, so
you see----"

"Oh, I do see, and I think that would be fine."

"My little Patty misses me, too, and so does Father. Aunt Barbara
is an excellent housekeeper and a good nurse when any one is ill,
but she is not much of a companion for daddy nor for Patty. Then,
too, I hate to be out of it all. I long to keep up with the college
news and the home doings, so I shall try going home at the end of
the week, for awhile, anyhow."

"And did grandma say I could go?"

"She actually did. I think she is a little afraid of taking
whooping-cough herself, for she asked me yesterday if I had
ever known of any grown person having it, and I do know of
several cases. I had it myself when I was three years old,
but your grandma cannot remember that she ever had."

"I'm glad she can't remember," returned Marian with a laugh. "Who
is going to hear our lessons, Miss Dorothy?"

"My sister Emily. She is two years younger than I, and is still
studying. She is taking special courses at college, but thinks
she can spare an hour or so a day to you chicks, especially as
she expects to teach after a while, and she will begin to
practise on you."

"I will take little Patty with me," declared Marian, picking up
that person from where she was seated on a large grape leaf under
a dahlia bush.

"So I would. I am sure she will like to visit Patty's dolls."

"Oh, Miss Dorothy, you are so nice," exclaimed Marian giving her a
little squeeze. "Grandma never says such things. She doesn't ever
like to make believe. She says the facts of life are so hard that
there is no time to waste in pretending." Marian's manner as she
said this was so like her grandmother's that Miss Dorothy could but
smile. "I am glad you took some of the photographs for papa before I
got the whoops," Marian went on; "the one at school and the one at
Mrs. Hunt's. Oh, dear Mrs. Hunt will be sorry to have me go."

"She will, I know. She told me this morning that she was going to
ask you to stay with her a while during the time you must be away
from school. Should you like that better than going to Revell?"

"I'd like both," answered Marian truthfully.

"That is often the way in this world," returned Miss Dorothy. "It
is frequently hard to choose between two equally good things. I
will bring you all the home news every week, and can tell you
whether Ruth knew her lessons, whether Marjorie was late, how
Mrs. Hunt's fall chickens are thriving, and what Tippy and
Dippy do in your absence. I shall be quite a newsmonger."

"What is a monger?"

"One who deals or sells. You can look it up in the dictionary
when you go back to the house."

The preparations for her departure went forward quickly, and
by Friday morning, Marian's trunk was packed, and all was in
readiness. Her grandfather actually kissed her good-bye and
gave her five cents. As her grandmother did not happen to be
on hand at that moment to require that Marian should deposit
the nickel in her missionary box, the child pocketed it in
glee, and, at Miss Dorothy's suggestion, bought a picture
postal card to send her father, giving her new address. Miss
Dorothy wrote it for her, addressed and mailed the card, so
Marian was satisfied that her father would know where she was.
"I don't like to have him not know," she told Miss Dorothy.
Mrs. Otway gave her granddaughter many charges to be a good
girl and give no trouble, to take care of her clothes properly
and not to forget to be obedient.

"As if I could forget," thought Marian.

Heppy had no remarks to make, but only grunted when Marian went to
say good-bye to her. However as the child left the kitchen Heppy
snapped out: "You'd better take along what belongs to you as long
as you're bound to go."

"Take what?" asked Marian wonderingly, not knowing that she had left
anything behind.

Heppy jerked her head in the direction of the table on which a
package was lying.

"What is it?" asked Marian curiously.

"Something that belongs to you," said Heppy turning her back and
taking her dish-towels out to hang in the sun.

Marian carried the package with her and later on found it contained
some of Heppy's most toothsome little cakes. "It is just like her,"
Marian told Miss Dorothy. "She acts so cross outside and all the
time she is feeling real kind inside."

Miss Dorothy laughed. "I am beginning to find that out, but I shall
never forget how grim she seemed to me when I first came."

Mr. Robbins' house was very near the college, and Marian thought
it the prettiest place she had ever seen. As they walked up the
elm-bordered street, the college grounds stretched away beyond them.
The gray buildings were draped in vines bright with autumn tints,
and the many trees showed the same brilliant colors. In front of the
Robbins' door was a pretty garden where chrysanthemums were all
a-bloom, and one or two late roses had ventured to put forth. A wide
porch ran along the front and one side the house, and on this Patty
stood watching for them. She was not long in spying them and hurried
down to meet them. "I am so glad you have whooping-cough," she
called out before they came up. Then as they met and embraced she
went on: "Isn't it fine, Marian, that we both have whooping-cough
and winter coats alike? We're most like twins, aren't we? Come right
in. There is a fire in the library, Dolly, and Emily has tea there
for you."

"Good!" cried her sister, "that will go to the spot this chilly
evening. Where are Aunt Barbara and dad?"

"Oh, puttering around somewhere."

"And the boys?"

"They went to practice for the game, but they ought to be home
by now."

They entered the house and went into the library where a tall,
dark-eyed girl was brewing tea. She looked up with a smile and
Marian saw that she was a little like Miss Dorothy. "Here she is.
Here is Marian," cried Patty.

Emily nodded pleasantly. "Come near the fire," she said. "It is
quite wintry out. How good it is to see you, Dolly. I am so glad
you are coming home every week."

"Oh, what are those?" said Miss Dorothy as her sister uncovered
a plate.

"Your favorite tea cakes, but you mustn't eat too many of them
or you will have no appetite for supper. It will be rather late
to-night for the boys cannot get back before seven and they begged
me to wait for them. I knew you would be hungry, though, and so I
had tea, ready for you."

The two little girls, side by side, comfortably sipped some very
weak tea and munched their cakes while the older girls chatted. But
Patty made short work of her repast. "Hurry up," she whispered to
Marian, "I have lots of things to show you and we shall have supper
after a while. Is your cough very bad?"

"Not yet."

"They say mine isn't but I hate the whooping part. I hope it won't
get worse."

"I'm afraid it will, for we've only begun to whoop and they say it
takes a long time to get over it."

"Oh, those old they-says always are telling you something horrid.
Come, let me show you the boys' puppies before it gets too dark to
see them; they're out in the shed."

"Oh, I'd love to see them." Marian despatched the remainder of her
cake and was ready to follow Patty out-of-doors to where five tiny
fox terriers were nosing around their little mother. They were duly
admired, then Patty showed the pigeons and the one rabbit. By this
time it was quite dark, so they returned to the house to see the
family of dolls who lived in a pleasant room up-stairs.

"This is where we are to have lessons," Patty told her guest.
"Isn't it nice? Those two little tables are to be ours, and
Emily will sit in that chair by the window. We arranged it all.
These are my books." She dropped on her knees before a row of
low book shelves.

"Oh, how many," exclaimed Marian. "I have only a few, and most
of those are old-fashioned. Some were my grandparents' and some
my father's."

"Doesn't your father ever get you any new ones?"

"He might if he were here," Marian answered, "but you see I don't
know him."

"Don't know your father?" Patty looked amazed.

"No. He lives in Germany, and hasn't been home for seven or
eight years."

"How queer. Isn't he ever coming?"

"I hope he is. I wrote to him not long ago."

"Why, don't you write to him every little while?"

"No, I haven't been doing it, but I am going to now," she said,
then, as a sudden thought struck her, she exclaimed: "Oh, dear,
I am afraid I can't."

"Why not?" asked Patty.

"Because I used Miss Dorothy's typewriter at home. I don't write
very well with a pen and ink, you know, though I can do better than
I did."

"Oh, I expect you do well enough," said Patty consolingly, "and if
you don't, dad has a typewriter, and maybe he will let you use that,
and if he won't I know Roy will let you write with his. It is only a
little one, but it will do."

"I think you are very kind," said Marian. "Is Roy your brother?"

"My second brother; his name is Royal. Frank is the oldest one
and Bert the youngest of the three. There are six of us, you
know; three girls and three boys. First Dolly and Emily, then
the boys and then me."

"I should think it would be lovely to have so many brothers and
sisters."

"It is, only sometimes the boys tease, and my sisters think I must
always do as they say because they are so much older, and sometimes
I want to do as I please."

"But oughtn't you to mind them?"

"Oh, I suppose so. At least when I don't and they tell daddy, he
always sides with them, so that means they are right, I suppose."

There was some advantage in not having too many persons to obey,
Marian concluded, and when the three boys came storming in, one
making grabs at Patty's hair, another clamoring to have her find his
books, and the third berating the other two, it did seem to Marian
that there were worse things than being the only child in the house.

However, the boys soon subsided, so the two little girls were left
in peace and Patty displayed all the wonders in her possession; the
delightful little doll house which the boys had made for her the
Christmas before, the dolls who inhabited it, five in number, Mr.
and Mrs. Reginald Montgomery, their two children and the black cook.
"The coachman and nurse have to live in another house, there isn't
room for them here," Patty informed Marian. "Which do you like best,
hard dolls or paper ones?"

"Sometimes one and sometimes another," returned Marian. "I don't
know much about paper dolls, though. Mrs. Hunt gave me some out of
an old fashion book, but they got wet, and I haven't any nice ones
now."

"Emily makes lovely ones," Patty told her, "and I'll get her to do
some for us; I know she will."

"How perfectly lovely," exclaimed Marian, beginning to feel that
she had been very lucky when Dame Fortune sent the Robbins family
her way.

"There is Emily calling now," said Patty. "I suppose supper is
ready and we must go down. I will show you the rest of my things
to-morrow. Coming, Emily," she answered as she ran down-stairs.

But it was because Marian's trunk had come that Emily wanted the
little girls, and when this was unpacked and Marian felt that she
was fairly established supper was announced. It was a plain but well
cooked and hearty meal such as suited the appetites of six healthy
young persons, three of them growing boys. As she saw the bread and
butter disappear, Marian wondered how the cook managed to keep them
supplied.

True to her promise Patty asked Emily about the paper dolls that
very evening and she smilingly consented to make them two apiece.
"Just a father and a mother and a little child," Patty begged her
sister.

"Very well," said Emily. "I think I can throw in the child."

"Marian, do you want the child to be a baby?" asked Patty.

"Oh, a tiny baby," said Marian. "If I may have that, I should be
delighted."

"You shall have it," promised Emily and straightway fell to work to
fill the contract for paper dolls, Marian watching her with a happy
face. To see any one actually drawing anything as lovely as these
promised to be was a new pleasure, and her ohs and ahs, softly
breathed as each was finished, showed her appreciation.

The two little girls took themselves to a corner of the library
where they could play undisturbed, making houses of the lower book
shelves. "Oh, may we do that?" asked Marian in surprise as she saw
Patty stacking the books on the floor.

"Oh, yes," was the answer, "if we put the books back again when we
have finished. You take that corner and I'll take this, then we'll
have plenty of room."

Such liberties were never allowed Marian at home, and she grew so
merry over Patty's funny make-believes that more than once Miss
Dorothy and her sister exchanged pleased glances, and once Miss
Dorothy murmured: "I'd like her father to see her now. She has
been starved for just that sort of cheerful companionship."

"She seems a very nice child," said Emily.

"She is," returned Miss Dorothy. "She has never had a chance to be
spoiled."

Bedtime came all too soon, and the books were reluctantly put back
on their shelves, the dolls safely stowed away in a large envelope,
and Miss Dorothy piloted the way to Patty's pretty little room which
she was to share with Marian.

As Miss Dorothy stooped to give the two a good-night kiss, Marian
whispered: "I've had such a lovely time. I'd like to live here
always. I hope my whooping-cough won't get well for a long time."




_CHAPTER X_

_Running Away_


The days for the most part went happily for the two little girls.
They spent much time out-of-doors, lessons taking up only two hours
a day. Beside the many outdoor plays which all children love there
were others which Patty invented, and these Marian liked best. The
two had some disagreements and a few quarrels, for Patty, being the
youngest child in her family, was a little spoiled, and liked her
own way. She was an independent, venturesome little body, and led
Marian into ways she had never tried before. She loved excitement
and was always planning something new and unusual.

One morning after the two had raced around the lawn till they were
tired, had climbed trees, jumped from the top step many times,
gathered chestnuts from the burrs newly opened by the frost, Patty
was at her wits' end to know what to do next. "Let's run away," she
said suddenly.

"Oh, what for?" said Marian to whom such adventures never suggested
themselves.

"Oh, just because; just to do something we haven't done," was the
reply.

"But where shall we run?"

"Oh, anywhere. Down there." Patty nodded toward the road which led
from the college grounds.

Marian looked dubious. "But where would we stay at night, and where
would we get anything to eat?"

"Oh, along the way somewhere."

"We haven't any money to buy food."

"No, but some one would give it to us if we asked."

"Why, then we would be beggars."

Patty nodded. "I've always thought I would like to try what it would
be like not to mind your clothes, nor your face and hands. It would
be rather fine, don't you think, not to have grown-ups say to you:
Be careful of your frock. Don't get your shoes wet. No lady ever has
such a face and hands."

"Ye-es," doubtfully from Marian. "Suppose we should get lost and
never find our way back."

"We couldn't if we kept a straight road. We might meet a princess in
disguise, riding in her carriage and she might take us in with her.
I should like to see a real princess."

"My father has seen one."

"I don't believe it."

"He has. Cross my heart. He wrote to grandma about her and said
she looked like any one else."

"Then she couldn't have been a real princess," said Patty
triumphantly.

"My father doesn't tell stories, I thank you," said Marian
indignantly.

"You don't know whether he does or not; you don't know him,"
retorted Patty.

Marian gave her one look, arose from where she was sitting, and
stalked into the house. Patty was at her heels in a moment. "Oh,
please don't get mad," she begged.

Marian made no reply for a moment, then she said in a low voice,
"I'm not exactly mad, but my feelings hurt me."

Patty was too warm-hearted to let this pass. She flung her arms
around her friend's neck. "I was horrid to say that," she said,
"when I have a father close by and you haven't any mother."

"Neither have you," returned Marian mollified.

"I know, but I have brothers and sisters, and live with my father. I
think, after all, Marian, we won't run away, but we might go down
that road a little way and see what it looks like."

"Haven't you ever been there?"

"No, we always go in the other direction." She did not say why, nor
did she tell Marian that she had been warned of a rowdy neighborhood
in the vicinity of some factories further on. "You see," she
continued, "it would be fun to pretend we were running away. We
could stay till it gets dark and we began to be afraid."

"Not till it is really dark," Marian improved on the suggestion,
"but just till it begins to be."

"Well, yes, that would do. Come on, let us start."

"Don't you think we ought to take some lunch?"

"Well, maybe, though I would rather trust to luck; it would be much
more exciting. I think I will take five cents that I have, and then
if we don't see any chance of getting something to eat we can buy
enough to keep us from getting very, very hungry." So saying, she
ran toward the house.

"Bring Patty Wee," called Marian after her.

"All right," answered Patty the Big from the door-step. She came out
again directly with the money clasped in her hand, and bearing Patty
Wee.

"I suppose we mustn't go near any children," said Marian as they
started off, "for we might give them the whooping-cough."

"I'm sure I don't want to go near any," replied Patty independently.
"See, the road we are going to take leads right past the chapel and
down that hill."

"What are those chimneys sticking up there at the foot of the hill,
where all that smoke is coming out?"

"They are the chimneys of the factories."

"What kind of factories?"

"Oh, some kind. I don't know. We can ask when we get home if you
would like to know." She hurried Marian past the big factory
buildings from which issued the clattering noise of machinery, and
from whose chimneys black smoke was pouring. At the foot of the hill
there was a little bridge spanning a rapid stream. Further up, the
stream was bordered by willows, and a meadow beyond seemed an
inviting playground. "Let's go up there," said Marian; "it looks
so pleasant."

"We might fish if we had a hook and line," said Patty, bent on some
new diversion.

"Oh, do you suppose there are any fish so near the factory?"

"There might be," returned Patty, "but as we haven't anything to
catch them with they are perfectly safe."

Marian laughed, then added, "I think I am glad they are, for I
don't believe it would make me very happy to see the poor things
struggling and gasping."

"Then it is just as well we can't catch them, for I don't want to
make you unhappy," said Patty. "See that big tree over there with
that flat rock near it? I think it looks as if it would be a nice
place to play."

"So it does. I wonder if we can reach it easily."

"I'll go and see. If it is all right I will call you. Just wait here
for me."

Marian sat down on the stump of a tree near the bridge to wait. It
was pleasant to hear the murmur of the water, and to watch the
little eddies and ripples. It was a true Indian summer day, warm and
hazy. The squirrels were whisking their tails in the trees near by,
and the crows were cawing in a corn field not far off. Marian was
enjoying it all very much when Patty called, "Come, Marian, come.
I've found something. Come around by the fence and creep under."

Marian obeyed and was soon by Patty's side. "What have you found?"

"Just see here," said Patty excitedly. "Some one has been playing
here before us."

Marian stooped down to look where, in a little cave made by the
large stone, was a small doll, a table made of a block of wood, some
bits of blue china for dishes, a row of acorns for cups, and a bed
of green moss. Outside stood a small cart made of a box with spools
for wheels.

"Isn't it cunning?" said Patty, appealed to by the unusual. "Now we
can play nicely."

"Do you think we ought to touch them?"

"Why not? They are out here where anybody could get them. I
shouldn't wonder if some child had been playing here and forgot all
about it. There's no telling how long they have been here." This
quieted Marian's scruples and they took possession. Patty Wee, as
they now called Marian's little doll, just fitted in the cart, so
she was brought in state to visit the cave doll, whom Patty called
Miggy Wig, neither knew just why.

It was much more interesting to serve grass and acorn kernels from
broken bits of china than it was to have a real tea-party in an
orderly nursery with real cups and saucers, and the strange doll
added to the zest of the play because she was an unknown. The
children speculated upon who might be her possible owner, and
wondered if she were mourned and missed, or only forgotten. A fat
toad, tempted out by the warm sunshine, hopped from under the stone
and sat blinking at the children in such a funny way that they
laughed so loud as to send him away.

Everything was going on merrily when presently the shrill whistle of
the factory announced that it was noon, and pretty soon crowds of
men, women, boys and girls trooped down the road toward a group of
small houses further along. It was a noisy, jostling crowd and the
two children were glad they were not nearer. They cowered down
behind the big rock to wait till the factory hands had passed by.

In a few minutes Patty peeped forth. "They've gone," she whispered.
"I don't believe they would have noticed us anyhow. Let's play that
the fat toad is an enchanted prince, and that Miggy Wig is going to
liberate him from his enchantment."

"All right," agreed Marian. "What shall Patty Wee be?"

"If Miggy Wig is the fairy, Patty Wee can be the princess who will
wed the prince. Now Miggy Wig and I are going to gather three kinds
of herbs to make the charm," said Patty.

Marian was delighted. She had but lately entered the wonderful
region of fairy-land, but under Patty's guidance was becoming very
familiar with its charms and enchantments.

Patty and Miggy Wig hied forth to gather the three kinds of herbs
while Marian kept watch with Patty Wee. It was now so quiet that
the toad ventured out again. Patty had dubbed him Prince Puff, a
very fitting name the girls agreed. Marian was watching him as he
did his funny act of swallowing, shutting his eyes and looking as
if he meant to eat his own head, Patty said, when suddenly voices
sounded behind her, angry voices.

"Well ain't that cheek?" cried some one.

Marian looked up and saw two shabby looking girls about her own age.
She quickly rose to her feet, letting Patty Wee slip to the ground.
The other Patty was some distance away.

"What business have you got here?" said the taller of the strange
girls, stepping up.

"Why, we're just playing," replied Marian.

"Just playing," mimicked the girl. "Do you hear that, Pearl? Just
playing with our things. Ain't that cheek for you? Let's show her
what we think of folks that steal our belongings."

"I haven't taken a thing," said Marian indignantly. "I am not a
thief."

"Where's my doll, then? Call me a liar, do you?" said the girl
fiercely, and stepping still nearer she gave Marian a sounding
slap on the cheek.

By this time Patty had seen the newcomers and had hurried up. "Don't
you dare touch my friend," she cried. "We're not doing any harm to
you and your things."

"Well, you've meddled with them, and you were going to take my doll;
you've got it now. Give it to me," and the girl snatched Miggy Wee
from Patty's hand. "They meddled, didn't they, Pearl?"

"Yes, they did," chimed in the younger girl. "They meddled, so
they did."

"Well, they've got to hustle off pretty quick or I'll set my
father's big dog on them. Get out, you thieves," she said to
Patty and Marian.

"We are not thieves," replied Patty indignantly.

"What were you doing with my doll, then?"

"I didn't know it was yours. I didn't know it belonged to any one."

"Oh, you didn't," in sarcastic tones. "Perhaps you thought it grew
here like that there weed; you look green enough to think that."

Patty clenched her hands and bit her lip to keep from making
an answer which she knew would only aggravate matters. She drew
herself up and gave the girl a withering look, then she turned
to Marian. "Come, let us go," she said.

"Oh, you think you're very grand, don't you," said the girl
teasingly. "Well, you're not, and I can tell you we're not
going to let you off so easy. You've got to pay for the use
of our playhouse. I'll take this in pay," and she grabbed
Patty Wee from Marian.

"Oh, no, no," cried Marian in distress, "you can't have my doll."

"I can't, can't I? I'll show you whether I can." And the girl faced
Marian so threateningly that she shrank away.

Then Patty thought of a device. "You'd better not come too near us,"
she cried, "for we've got the whooping-cough," and indeed just then
by reason of the excitement she did have a paroxysm of coughing
which plainly showed that she spoke truly.

The girl backed away, and as soon as Patty had recovered, she
grasped Marian's hand and hurried her away. "Never mind Patty
Wee," she said; "I'll get you another just like her. Let's get
away as fast as we can."

Marian realized that this was the wiser plan, and they hurried
off, their two enemies calling after them mockingly.

Their breathless flight set them both coughing, and when they
recovered breath they both walked soberly on without saying a
word, their object being to get as far away as possible from
the scene of trouble. Up hill and down again they trudged, and
presently saw ahead of them a house and garden at the junction
of two roads.

"I never saw that place before," said Patty, looking at it with a
puzzled air. "I'm sure I don't know where we are."

"Oh, Patty," exclaimed Marian in dismay, "are we lost?"

"Well no, not exactly. We'll stop at that house and ask the way."

As they approached they saw that the front of the house was a small
country store, so they went around to the door and opened it. A bell
jangled sharply as they entered, and from somewhere in the rear a
woman came forward. "What's wanting?" she asked.

"Will you tell us how far we are from Revell?" said Patty. "We want
to go there, to the college."

The woman looked at her with some curiosity.

"It's about three miles," she said. "You go up this road and turn to
your left about a mile on, just before you come to the factories.
You pass by them and keep straight on."

"Thank you," said Patty. Then seeing piles of rosy apples, boxes of
crackers, and such eatables, she realized that she was very hungry.
"Will you tell me what time it is?" she said.

The woman looked up at a big clock over the door. "It is after two,"
she said, "about quarter past."

"Oh, dear," Patty looked at Marian, "we can't get back to dinner."
Suddenly all the joys of a gypsy life faded away. She looked at the
apples, felt in her coat pocket for her five cents, and fortunately
found it. "How much are those apples?" she asked.

"Ten cents a quarter peck," the woman told her.

"Oh, I meant how much apiece."

"I guess you can have 'em for a cent apiece. There'll be about ten
in a quarter, I expect."

"Then I'll take two." The woman picked out two fine red ones and
handed them to her. "I have three cents left," said Patty. "What
shall I get, Marian?" Her eyes roved along the shelves.

"That soft mixture's nice," said the woman, "and it's right fresh."

"Can I get three cents' worth?"

"Oh, yes."

"Then I'll take it."

The woman took down a box of mixed cakes and weighed out the
necessary amount. Patty gave the five cents and the two little
girls left the store.

"I never was so hungry," said Patty, her teeth immediately seeking
the apple.

"Nor I," said Marian, following her example. And they trudged along
munching the apples till they reached the top of the hill. They
could see the factory chimneys in the distance and knew they could
find their way, though both dreaded to pass the neighborhood of the
rude girls who must live near the factory. They almost held their
breath as they approached the spot, but they got by safely, and
toiled on toward home, two thoroughly weary, disgusted little
girls.

"It wasn't much fun," said Marian plaintively, as they neared the
house.

"I shall never, never want to go that way again," said Patty
contritely. "We haven't had any real dinner; I've spent my five
cents, and you've lost Patty Wee."

At the thought of this last disaster Marian's eyes filled. "Don't
feel so," said Patty in distress. "I'll buy you another the very
first time I go to the city. I know Dolly will give me five cents."

"But it won't be Patty Wee," said Marian mournfully.

Patty was honest enough to go straight to her sister Emily with
the whole story of the morning's trouble. "You knew you were
disobedient, didn't you, Patty?" said Emily gently. "Now you see
why daddy always forbade your going down that way. He knows those
factory people are a rough set."

Patty hung her head. "I know I was as bad as could be, Emily, but
I'll never do it again."

"The worst part is that you led Marian into it, for she didn't know,
as you did, that you mustn't go that way. You say those girls struck
her, and took her doll away from her. I think she had the worst of
it, and yet it was all your fault, Patty."

"Oh, dear, oh, dear, I am wickeder than I thought," sobbed Patty.
"What can I do, Emily, to make up for it? I will do anything you
think I ought. I spent my five cents and I haven't any more to get
another Patty Wee."

"If you will go without dessert for a week I will give you five
cents to buy another doll. I think you have had punishment enough
otherwise, but you can't make up to Marian for having those girls
treat her so."

Patty's tears flowed afresh, but she agreed to give up what meant a
great deal to her.

However, the five cents did not go toward buying another Patty Wee,
for when Patty told her brothers of the morning's adventure, they
looked at each other knowingly, and a little later on plotted
together in the shed. So a few days after they triumphantly appeared
with the lost Patty Wee which they restored to the delighted Marian.
They would never tell how they recovered the doll, but Pearl and
Evelina have memories of three big determined boys bearing down
upon them when they were playing under the big tree, boys who
demanded a doll taken by force, and having great respect for
manly strength the girls gave up Patty Wee without a word.




_CHAPTER XI_

_A Letter's Reply_


The lovely Indian summer was over, and Thanksgiving Day passed
happily. It was a great time for Marian, for Miss Dorothy was home
for several days and together they planned the book of photographs
to be sent to Marian's father. "I think it would better go in ample
time," said Miss Dorothy, "for at Christmas time there will be such
budgets going that we must be sure to get ours in before the rush
begins. I should give it two or three weeks anyhow, and even if it
does get there too soon, that will be better than too late."

"Don't you think it is time I was getting an answer to my letter?"
asked Marian.

"It is high time, but perhaps your father has been away, and has not
had his mail forwarded."

And indeed that was exactly the way of it as was proved the very
next day when the morning's mail brought Marian her long-looked-for
letter. She trembled with excitement when Mr. Robbins placed it in
her hands, and her eyes eagerly sought Miss Dorothy. "Won't you go
with me somewhere and read it to me?" she whispered.

Miss Dorothy hesitated. "Perhaps your father has written it for your
eyes alone."

"But suppose I can't read it."

"Well, then we'll go to my room and you can open it there. If you
can't read it I'll help you out. Will that do?"

"Oh, yes, thank you, dearest Miss Dorothy." Marian had learned from
Patty to use many endearing terms.

They went up-stairs to the pleasant front room with its pretty paper
and hangings of roses on a creamy ground, and by the window they sat
down while Marian carefully opened the envelope. As she unfolded the
sheet of paper it held, something fell out in her lap. "It is a
photograph of papa," she cried as she picked it up. "I never had one
of my very own, and see, Miss Dorothy, the letter is typewritten so
I can read it quite easily, but please sit by me while I see what he
says."

It was a long, loving letter in which the writer spoke of the
pleasure it had been to him to hear from his little daughter, of
how her accounts of her daily life had taken him back to his own
childhood, and of how often he thought of her and longed to see her.
"If I thought it best, my dear little daughter," he said, "I should
not let the ocean roll between us, though some day I hope you can
come to me if I may not go to you." There were many more things,
entertaining descriptions of the places to which he had lately been,
accounts of his doings and his friends, the whole ending with a
request that Marian would write as often as she could. As she
finished the closing lines Marian held out the letter to Miss
Dorothy. "Do read it," she said. "I know he would not care. There
isn't anything in it that you mustn't see. I'd like you to read it
out loud to me, Miss Dorothy; I can't quite get the sense of it
myself." So Miss Dorothy did as she was requested and agreed with
Marian that it was a very nice letter, that her father did love
her, and that the reason he did not come home was because he felt
he would not be welcome.

After this it was an all-important matter to get the photographs
ready to send and to write a letter in answer to the one Marian had
just received. Patty was very much interested in the photographs,
for besides those taken in Greenville of Marian and the cats in
the garden, of Marian at school, in the sitting-room with her
grandparents, in her own room and in Mrs. Hunt's kitchen, there
were a number taken in Revell where various members of the Robbins
family appeared and where Patty herself was always a conspicuous
figure. But the very last one was of Marian alone with arms
outstretched and face upheld for a kiss. Under it was written,
"A hug and kiss for you, dear papa, when you come back to your
little Marian." This was the child's own idea, and Miss Dorothy
carried it out as well as she could.

"Just think," Marian said to Patty, "how much better I know my papa,
and I shall keep on knowing him better and better."

"Shall you show your grans the photographs, and the one of him?"
asked Patty.

"Yes," returned Marian thoughtfully, "Miss Dorothy thinks I ought
to, and that I shall have to tell about my writing to him. I think
grandma will be glad, and maybe grandpa will be, too, though he
won't say so."

Miss Dorothy overhearing this wise remark, smiled. She quite
believed that both Mr. and Mrs. Otway would be glad.

As the days were getting both colder and shorter Miss Dorothy
decided that, for the present at least, she must give up coming home
every week, and must wait till the Christmas holidays before seeing
her family again. On the day she announced this she said also that
Mrs. Otway had said that Marian had stayed away long enough. Miss
Almira Belt was getting better and her sister could now help with
the sewing, especially as a niece was coming to help her, so as
Marian needed a new frock she must come home the following Monday
with Miss Dorothy. Mrs. Hunt had said she was longing for a sight of
her chickadee, Mr. Otway had remarked that it would be pleasant to
hear a child's voice in the house once again, and so Marian must go.

Patty was in tears at this news, and Marian herself looked very
sorry. "Don't you want to go?" asked Miss Dorothy. "Tippy and Dippy
are very anxious to see you and so is Rosamond. I saw her sitting in
your room all alone the other day, and she looked very forlorn."
Rosamond was Marian's big doll. "I told Ruth you were coming back,
and she said: 'Good, good. Give my love to her and tell her I am
crazy to see her. I've had the whooping-cough and I'm not a bit
afraid of her.' Then, too," Miss Dorothy bent her head and
whispered: "Some one who has the room next yours misses you
very much and longs for her little neighbor."

Marian smiled at this, but at sight of Patty's tears grew grave
again. "If I could take Patty with me," she said, "I should not mind
it a bit."

"Maybe Patty can come some time. Mrs. Hunt asked me to bring her and
to let her make a little visit there at her house, so we will think
of it later on."

This was so pleasant a prospect that Patty brightened up, and though
at parting she could not be comforted, Marian went away rather
happier than she expected. There would be some excitement in getting
back. She would go to see Mrs. Hunt very often, and perhaps Ruth
Deering would come to see her, or her grandmother would let her
spend an afternoon with Ruth sometimes. Mrs. Otway approved of Ruth,
she remembered. But here the thought of Patty came up, and Marian
realized that no one could take Patty's place, dear, bright, funny,
affectionate Patty, who had been so generous and loving, though she
did fly into a temper sometimes and say things she was sorry for
afterward. She had tried to help Marian with her writing and had
encouraged her so that now Marian could form her letters very well
and need not be ashamed when she went back to school. Then, too,
Patty had pressed upon her a favorite book of fairy tales which they
had read together and which had been the groundwork of many
delightful plays. Oh, no, there was nobody like Patty.

Yet as Marian walked with Miss Dorothy up the familiar street, she
felt that it was not bad to get back again. There was Mrs. Hunt
watching out for her at the gate, to give her a tremendous hug and
many kisses. There was Miss Hepzibah Toothacre, "pleasant as pie,"
at the door to welcome back the child. "Here she is," cried Heppy,
and from his study rushed grandpa, from the sitting-room issued
grandma, both eager to get to Marian first. "Heigho, heigho, little
girl," said grandpa, "it is good to get you back again."

"Well, my dear, how are you? Come kiss grandma," came from Mrs.
Otway, and Marian, pleased and surprised, felt that home was not
such a bad place after all.

Then there were Dippy and Tippy, and also a surprise, for Heppy
mysteriously led the way to the wood-shed which was just outside the
kitchen, and what should Marian see there but three new baby kittens
with Tippy proudly rubbing and purring around. Marian was on her
knees before them in a minute, and had picked out the prettiest to
cuddle. "Oh, if I might only keep this one," she said, "and perhaps
we could find homes for the others."

"I guess Mis' Otway ain't goin' to allow three cats under foot,"
said Heppy discouragingly. And indeed when Marian made her request
to keep one of the kittens she was straightway denied.

"You may keep two cats," said Mrs. Otway, "but no more will I have.
If you choose to get rid of one of the larger ones and keep the
little kitten I have no objection, but you will have to decide that
for yourself."

But here, as usual, Mrs. Hunt came to the rescue. "Now, chickadee,"
she said, when Marian told her the dilemma she was in, "you just let
me have that nice big gray cat of yours. Our house cat got so he
wouldn't live anywhere but in the stable, and grew so wild that I
scarcely ever saw him; finally he went away altogether. You bring
Dippy here and then you can see him as often as you want to."

Although Marian hated to give up Dippy, she knew he would have the
best of homes with Mrs. Hunt, and she did yearn so for the new
kitten that she finally decided to turn Dippy over to her good
friend. This seemed wise for more reasons than one, for his mother
was rather cross to him since her new family had arrived and so
Dippy settled down quite content to be petted and made much of by
Mrs. Hunt while Marian adopted the new kitten which she called Muff.
As Tippy's real name was Tippet, she thought Muff and Tippet went
rather well together. One of the other kittens found a home with
Ruth Deering, but the third was still unprovided for.

Lessons did not stop, although there was no Miss Emily to hear them.
Miss Dorothy told Marian every day what her class would have the
next, and Mrs. Otway heard her granddaughter recite whenever she
had time; when she did not, Miss Dorothy gave up a half hour in
the evening to the child, so she managed to keep abreast with her
schoolfellows and made great progress with her writing, now that
she had more time for practice, and since the weather housed her
more than formerly.

The photographs were sent off a good three weeks before Christmas,
and a duplicate set was made for the grans as well as one for Mrs.
Hunt. "For," said Marian, "if the grans don't care about Christmas
gifts, I do, and I like to give."

As for Miss Dorothy and Patty, Marian was at her wits' end to know
what to bestow upon them. She consulted Miss Dorothy as to Patty.
"Miss Dorothy," she said, "I shall be very unhappy if I can't give
Patty a Christmas gift, and I haven't a thing in the world she would
like."

Miss Dorothy, who was busy with some fancy work for Christmas, did
not reply for a moment and Marian could see that she had on her
thinking cap. "Yes, you have something," presently said Miss
Dorothy, "you have the third kitten."

"Oh, Miss Dorothy, do you think she would like him?"

"I am sure she would be delighted."

"But won't the dogs eat him up?"

"No, they're not allowed in the house and Jip is so intelligent that
she will understand that neither she nor her puppies must touch the
kitten."

"How will I get the kitten to her?"

"I can take it in a basket when I go home for the holidays."

"You always do what I hope you will," confessed Marian. "If all the
thank-yous I feel were piled up they would reach to the skies."

"I am sure," laughed Miss Dorothy, "nothing could express your
gratitude more perfectly. What shall you name the kitten? I think it
would please Patty if he came to her with a name already attached to
him, a name that you had given him."

Marian sat thinking, then she smiled and her smile grew broader and
broader till she broke out with: "I know what to call him; Prince
Puff, and I will tell her that he is the fat toad in a new form; he
is still under enchantment."

Miss Dorothy laughed, for she knew all about the play under the big
tree near the factory. "I think that would please Patty mightily,"
she told Marian.

"And, isn't it funny," Marian went on, "his name rhymes with Muff.
Patty will like that, too. She likes us to have things alike, so I
will have Muff and she will have Puff, Muff's brother. I am so
relieved to have Patty's present all settled."

But for her beloved Miss Dorothy there was still nothing, so Marian
racked her brains to devise some gift. At last she decided that
nothing was too good for one she loved so well, and that as the most
precious thing she possessed was her father's photograph she must
give that to her teacher. So, just before Miss Dorothy took her
departure for the holidays she went to her to slip a small package
in her hand. On the outside was written: "I am giving you this
because I love you so much. A Merry Christmas from Marian." "You
mustn't open it till Christmas day," she said earnestly.

"I will not," Miss Dorothy assured her. "Thank you now, dearie, for
I am sure whatever it is I shall be pleased to have it. I wish you
were going to spend the day with us."

"I wish so, too, but grandma said I had already been at Revell long
enough to wear out my welcome."

"I didn't see a sign of its being threadbare when you came away,"
Miss Dorothy told her. "Now, have we Puff all safe?"

"Yes, he is asleep in his basket. You won't forget to tie the card
around his neck with the red ribbon."

"No, I'll not forget. You must be sure to look on the inside knob of
my clothes-press door the first thing Christmas morning."

"I won't forget that. I think it is fine to have a secret waiting in
there for me."

"Here is the key. I know I can trust you not to open it till then."

"Indeed you can trust me."

"I am sure of it. Now give me a good hug and a kiss for Patty, for I
must be off."

Marian needed no second bidding, and in a few minutes was watching
Miss Dorothy go down the street carrying the basket that held Puff,
and walking swiftly to catch her train. There were big tears in
Marian's eyes as she turned from the window, for it seemed as if
the sunshine had faded away with Miss Dorothy's going, and that
Christmas would be only a gray every-day sort of time with no Patty
to make it merry, and no Miss Dorothy to add to its cheer.

However, when her grandmother called her it was to do rather an
interesting thing, for a Christmas box for the poor minister of a
distant parish was to be packed, and Marian enjoyed handing her
grandmother the articles to be put in and to talk over them. Grandma
knew the circumstances of the family to whom the box was going and
that there was a little girl somewhat younger than Marian to whom
her out-grown clothes would go. Marian thought she would have
enjoyed sending something more personal, and said so.

"Is there nothing you can make a sacrifice of, my child?" asked her
grandmother solemnly. "Christmas is the time for that, you know.
Our Lord gave His best to us and that is why we also give."

Marian turned over in her mind her various possessions. She simply
could not give up Patty Wee after all the dangers she had been
through, neither could she part with her big doll, for that had been
Annie Hunt's, and had been given to herself only because Annie's
mother was so fond of Ralph Otway's daughter. Muff was out of the
question for he would smother in that box. But there were the paper
dolls Miss Emily had made. She could give them. So she went
up-stairs, took out the envelope which contained these treasures,
softly kissed each painted face and said, "You are going to a new
home, my dears, and I hope you will like it. Good-bye, Mr. Guy
Mannering, good-bye, Mrs. Mannering, good-bye, little baby." She
put them all back in the envelope and carried it down-stairs. "I am
going to send these to Mary Eliza," she said steadily. "They are the
paper dolls Miss Emily made me."

"That is my good girl," said her grandmother. "Your gift will come
back to you in some other form, some day. I am much pleased that
my little granddaughter is so disposed to be generous with the
bounties the Lord has bestowed upon her." And Marian really felt
quite light-hearted the rest of the day.

Her spirits, too, were further lightened that afternoon when she was
made the special messenger to carry to Miss Almira Belt the very
lavender and white wrapper which she and Patty had picked out that
day when they were doing the make-believe shopping. Marian, of
course, told Mrs. Hunt all about it, and as one of the Guild which
looked after such things, it had been voted to give Miss Almira some
such present, and Mrs. Hunt had gone with Mrs. Perkins to select it.
They had all agreed that Marian's choice was such a good one that it
must be bought if possible, and fortunately Mrs. Hunt was able to
get the very wrapper she wanted. On account of Marian's part in the
matter she was asked to carry the gift to Miss Almira, and thus one
of her make-believes actually came true.




_CHAPTER XII_

_The Christmas Tree_


Christmas morning Marian awoke very early. She slipped out of bed
and went to the window. A few stars were still in the sky, though
the gray dawn was stealing up the land. In a few minutes the church
bells pealed out upon the wintry air. Marian folded her hands and
thought of the shepherds and the wise men, the little infant Jesus
in the manger and all the rest of the beautiful story. But it was
cold by the window and she determined to get back into bed till she
should be called. Then she suddenly remembered that this was "first
thing in the morning" and that she need not wait to open Miss
Dorothy's locked clothes-press. She could find out what was there.

So she softly struck a match, lighted her candle and tiptoed across
the floor, first taking the key from its place on the mantel. For a
moment a wild hope came to her that it might be a Christmas tree, a
little one, behind that locked door, but that idea faded away for
she remembered that Miss Dorothy had said, "I would like to set up a
Christmas tree for you, dearie, but it is your grandma's house and I
would not have the right to do it if she disapproves," and so it
could not possibly be a Christmas tree.

She set down her candle, unlocked the door and felt for what should
hang on the knob inside. As she did so she smothered a little cry
of delight for her hand grasped a well-filled stocking. Quickly
unfastening it, she skurried back to her room with the treasure. In
another moment she was snuggled down under the warm covers examining
the contents of her stocking. It held all the foolish and pleasant
things which such stockings usually hold, and to these were added
sundry little gifts. A note pinned on the outside read:

    "DEAREST MARIAN:

    "I hope you will like your stocking. It is exactly such as
    Patty will have, and I know you will be pleased to have it
    so. A Merry Christmas from all of us at Revell.

        "Lovingly yours,
            "DOROTHY ROBBINS."

A stocking just like Patty's! What joy! Perhaps at that very moment
Patty was looking at hers. It was so delightful to open the small
packages, to find a beautiful paper-doll from Miss Emily, a funny
cheap toy from each of the boys: a silly monkey, a quacking duck and
a jumping jack; a little fairy tale book from Patty, and oh, wonder!
the Roman sash from Miss Dorothy. Even Mr. Robbins and Aunt Barbara
had contributed, the former a little purse with a ten cent piece in
it, and the latter a box of her famous nut candy. Surely never was a
stocking more appreciated and more gloated over.

It was broad daylight and her grandmother was calling her before
Patty realized that her candle had burned down to its socket and
that it was time to get up. She huddled her gifts back into the
stocking and hurried to get bathed and dressed, for a day beginning
so delightfully must surely have more happiness in it. And indeed
this did seem to be so, for though her presents from her
grandparents were, as usual, useful, among them was a set of furs,
just what Marian had longed for since she saw Patty's, and there
was also a little typewriter for her very self from her grandpa.
Marian's mustard seeds were surely doing their work.

There were buckwheat cakes for breakfast, too, and Heppy beckoned
Marian to the kitchen afterward. A row of mince pies stood on the
table, and at the end of the row was a little scalloped one, "for
you," said Heppy. There was a pair of queerly shaped figures, too,
among the ginger-snaps. Heppy gave a funny chuckle as she picked
them out. "I guess nobody'd know what they're intended for," she
said. "I guess I won't go into the sculping business, for I find
I'm no hand at making figgers."

But Marian was as delighted with these as if they had been perfect
and bore them with the rest of her things to show Mrs. Hunt.

Her grans had smiled indulgently when she showed her stocking,
but had not seemed to think very much of it. Mrs. Otway said she
supposed Miss Dorothy had paid a pretty penny for the sash, and it
was more than she ought to have done. Mr. Otway thought Marian must
be too big a girl to care for jumping-jacks and such foolishness,
but that was the most that was said.

One of the events of Christmas day had always been the visit to
Mrs. Hunt, for this usually meant the best of the day's doings, and
Marian was always in a hurry to get off, but this time she was not
in such haste, for she liked to linger over her delightful stocking,
and enjoyed trying her typewriter while her grandfather showed her
how to use it. So it was not till her elders set out for church that
she was ready. Her cough shut her out of any churchgoing for a
while, but she begged to wear her new furs to show Mrs. Hunt, and
was given consent.

The church bells were all ringing as she entered Mrs. Hunt's door.
"I thought you wouldn't get here at all," said Mrs. Hunt in response
to Marian's "Merry Christmas!" "I was getting real anxious about
you. Come right in out of the cold. What made you so late,
chickadee?"

"Because it has been such a glad morning," Marian answered. "I don't
care anything about moving mountains any more, though it would have
been nice to have a tree, too."

"It would, would it? Well, I don't know. Is that for me?" as Marian
presented the book of photographs. "Well, I declare, isn't that you
all over? This is a Christmas gift worth having. What a Miss Dorothy
it is. Come, kiss me, dearie, you couldn't have given me anything I
like better. Now tell me what has made you so glad."

Then Marian displayed her stocking and her furs, and was describing
her typewriter when Mrs. Hunt said: "Then I suppose you won't care
about what I have for you."

"Oh, Auntie Hunt, you know I always care," returned Marian
reproachfully. "I never had a Christmas stocking before, and
I did so want furs."

"Bless her dear heart! Auntie Hunt was only teasing you a little.
Well, I don't believe what I have will wait much longer, so perhaps
we'd better go look at it." And she led the way to the parlor.

Marian wondered at this, for she was not such a stranger as to be
taken there even upon such a day as Christmas. What could Mrs. Hunt
have in there that she couldn't bring into the sitting-room? She had
always had Marian's present and her little basket of goodies set on
a side table and why must they be in the parlor to-day? She
wondered, too, why Mrs. Hunt fumbled at the door-knob and rattled
it a little before she went in, but when she saw at the end of the
room a bright and dazzling Christmas tree, she forgot all else. It
was such a glittering, shining affair, all wonderful ornaments and
gleaming tinsel, and was a joy to look upon, from the flying angel
at the tip-top to the group of sheep on a mossy pasture at the foot.
The impossible had happened. Faith and works had triumphed. The
might of the mustard seed's strength had been proved, and Marian
dropped on her knees before the marvelous vision. "Oh, I am so
happy, Lord. I am so much obliged to you for your loving-kindness,"
she breathed.

"That's just like her," said Mrs. Hunt nodding her head as if to
some one behind her. "You are pleased, aren't you, chickadee? Well,
now, who do you think gave you all those pretty things? Mr. Hunt cut
the tree and brought the moss, I'm ready to confess. I helped with
the trimming, but who did the rest?"

"Miss Dorothy," promptly replied Marian.

Mrs. Hunt shook her head. "Wrong guess," she said laughing. "Stand
right there and shut your eyes while I count ten, then see if you
can make a better guess."

Marian did as she was told, squeezing her eyes tight together lest
she should be tempted to peep at the tree. As "ten" fell from Mrs.
Hunt's lips her eyes opened, not upon the tree, for between her and
it stood the figure of a tall man who held out his arms to her.
Marian stood stock still in amazed wonder, gazing at him fixedly,
then in a voice that rang through the room she cried: "Papa! Papa!"
and in an instant his arms were around her and she was fairly
sobbing on his breast.

"It's almost more than the child can bear," murmured Mrs. Hunt
wiping her eyes. "I don't know that it was right to surprise her
so. Maybe it would have been better to prepare her." But Marian
was herself in a little while, ready to hear how this wonderful
thing happened.

"It was all on account of that little book of photographs," her
father told her. "My longing to see my dear little daughter grew
stronger and stronger as I turned over the pages, and when I came to
the last picture I simply could not stand it. I rushed out, looked
up the next sailing, and found I could make a steamer sailing from
Bremen the next morning, and before night I was on my way to that
city. I found I had a couple of hours to spare in Bremen, and I
remembered that my little girl had said that she had never had a
Christmas tree, so I went up town, bought a jumble of Christmas
toys, and took them to the steamer with me. I reached here last
night, and my dear old friend Mrs. Hunt took me in. Between us all
we set up the Christmas tree, and arranged the surprise. I felt as
if I could not spend another Christmas day away from my dear little
daughter when she wanted me so much. Do you think they will let me
in at the brick house, Marian?" he asked holding her close.

"I am sure they will," she answered with conviction. "I've found out
that nobody is as cross inside as they seem outside. Even Heppy is
just like a bear sometimes, but she has the most kind thinkings when
you get at them."

It was hard to leave the beautiful tree, but even that was not so
great and splendid a thing as this home-coming of Marian's father,
and when the churchgoers had all gone by, the two went up street
together, hand in hand. At the door of the brick house they paused.

"Tell them I am here and ask them if I may come in, Marian," said
her father, as he stood on the steps.

Marian went in, and entered the sitting-room. Her grandmother was
taking off her bonnet. "It was a good sermon, my dear," she was
saying to her husband. "Peace and good-will to all men, not to
some, but to all, our own first." She smoothed out her gloves
thoughtfully. "Eight years," she murmured, "eight years."

Marian stood in the doorway. "Papa has come," she said simply. "He
is on the door-step, but he won't come in till you say he may."

With a trembling little cry her grandmother ran to the door. Mr.
Otway grasped the back of the chair behind which he was standing.
His head was bowed and he was white to the lips. "Tell him to come
in," he said.

Marian ran out to see her grandmother, her grave, quiet, dignified
grandmother, sobbing in her son's arms, and he kissing her bowed
head and murmuring loving words to her.

"Grandpa says please come in," said Marian giving the message with
added politeness, and with one arm around his mother and the other
grasping Marian's hand, Ralph Otway entered his father's house to
meet the hand clasp of one who for more than eight years had
forbidden him entrance.

The remainder of Marian's day was spent in making visits to Mrs.
Hunt's parlor and to her grandmother's sitting-room. When the
grown-ups' talk began to grow uninteresting and herself unnoticed
she would slip away to gloat over the Christmas tree, then when she
had firmly fixed in her mind just what hung on this side and on
that, she would go back to the sitting-room to nestle down by her
father, or to turn over the contents of her stocking.

It was during this process that she heard part of a conversation
which interested her very much. "Herbert Robbins wrote me not
long ago to ask if I could suggest a fitting man for one of the
engineering departments of the college," said Grandpa Otway. "I told
him I would consider the matter, and if any one occurred to me I
would let him know. How would you like the work, Ralph?" he went on
in his measured tones. "Revell is not far away; it is a progressive
college in a pleasant community."

Marian laid down her stocking and came nearer.

"I should like to look into the matter," said her father
thoughtfully.

"I would advise your seeing Robbins," said his father. "He can give
you the particulars." Then he added somewhat hesitatingly, "I should
like--I should be pleased to have my son one of the faculty of my
own college."

Marian's father looked up brightly. "Thank you, father; that settles
it. If it is as good a thing as now appears I shall not hesitate to
accept if I am given the opportunity."

"Are you going to see Patty?" whispered Marian, "and couldn't I go,
too?"

Her father looked down at her with a smile. "I'd like you to go if
your grandmother is willing."

Therefore before the holidays were over Marian had the pleasure of
showing off her new furs as well as her dear papa to Patty and the
rest of the Robbinses, and before she came back it was settled that
her father was to go to Revell to live. Beyond that nothing of much
consequence was decided at that time.

Patty and Marian were jubilant over the arrangement. "Perhaps you
will come here to live some day," Patty said to her friend.

"I wish I could," said Marian. "Do you think papa will need me more
than the grans, Patty?"

"Of course," returned Patty, "for your grandfather has a wife to
take care of him and she has a husband, and it isn't fair they
should have you, too; besides a father is a nearer relation than a
grandfather, so of course he has a right to you." And this quite
settled it in Marian's opinion.

The little girls had two happy days together when Marian enjoyed
Patty's tree and her Christmas gifts only in a little less degree
than her own. She was pleased to find that Puff was already a great
pet, and that Patty had all sorts of mysterious things to tell about
him; of how he would steal out at night and become a real prince
between midnight and dawn, and of how Miggy Wig had deserted the
cave and was no longer a doll, but that she had worked her
enchantments only so far as to turn Puff from a toad into a kitten
during the day, so the little cat did actually appear to be more
than an ordinary animal to both children.

It took only a short time for Marian and her father to become great
chums, and they had many good times together sharing many secrets
which they did not tell the grans.

Miss Dorothy did not go home very often during the winter, so on
Saturdays and Sundays when her father came home from Revell, Marian
took many pleasant walks with the two. Sometimes they made an
excursion to the city, when real shopping took the place of
make-believes.

Marian went back to school after the holidays and never failed to
stop every day to see Mrs. Hunt. It was in the spring that she
learned from this good friend that her father did not tell her all
his secrets, for one day when they were talking of that happy
Christmas day Marian said, "What do you suppose Miss Dorothy did
with the Christmas gift I gave her? I have never seen it anywhere
and she has never said a word about it."

"What was it?" asked Mrs. Hunt.

"The photograph of papa that he sent me. I wanted to give her
something very precious and that was the best thing I had."

To Marian's surprise Mrs. Hunt threw back her head and laughed till
the tears came, though Marian could not see that she had said
anything very funny.

When Mrs. Hunt had wiped her eyes she remarked: "We shall miss Miss
Dorothy next year."

"Why, isn't she coming back to teach?" asked Marian in dismay.

Mrs. Hunt shook her head.

"Oh, why not?"

"Ask your papa; he knows," said Mrs. Hunt laughing again.

But before Marian had a chance to do this, Patty came to make Mrs.
Hunt the long-promised visit, and it was Patty who guessed the
secret. "Did you know that Miss Dorothy is not coming back here next
year?" was one of Marian's first questions.

Patty nodded. "I heard her say so to Emily."

"Then you will have her and I shall not," returned Marian jealously.

"Oh, yes, I think you will have her as much as I," returned Patty,
"for she is making all sorts of pretty things and I think she is
going to be married."

"Be married?" Such a possibility had never occurred to Marian. "Oh,
dear," she began, then she brightened up as she thought perhaps it
might be the new rector Miss Dorothy was going to marry; in that
case she would be living in Greenville. She remembered that the
young man often walked home with her teacher. It would be a very
nice arrangement, Marian thought. "Is she going to live in
Greenville?" she asked, feeling her way.

"No," Patty laughed. "I don't think so."

Then perhaps the young rector was going to another town. "Has she
told you where she is going to live and who she is going to marry?"
asked Marian coming straight to the point.

"No, but I know she is going to live in Revell, and I hear her and
Emily talk, talk, talk about some one named Ralph." Patty put her
hand over her mouth, and looked at Marian with laughing eyes.

"Why--why----" Marian looked at Patty for further enlightenment, but
Patty was only laughing. "Why, that's my papa's name," said Marian.

Patty nodded. "That's just who I think it is." And that was
precisely who it was.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Maid Marian, by Amy E. Blanchard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE MAID MARIAN ***

***** This file should be named 19988.txt or 19988.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/9/8/19988/

Produced by Jacqueline Jeremy, Audrey Longhurst and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Capitola's Peril, by Mrs. E.D.E.N. Southworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Capitola's Peril
       A Sequel to 'The Hidden Hand'

Author: Mrs. E.D.E.N. Southworth

Release Date: January 17, 2008 [EBook #24337]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPITOLA'S PERIL ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note: The Table of Contents was not in the original text
and has been generated for the convenience of the reader of this E-Book.




_CAPITOLA'S PERIL_

A Sequel to "The Hidden Hand"



By

MRS. E.D.E.N. SOUTHWORTH

Author of

"Ishmael," "Self-Raised," "Cruel as the Grave,"
"Tried for Her Life," Etc.



    "And such a night "she" took the road in
    As ne'er poor sinner was abroad in.

         *     *     *     *     *

    That night a child might understand
    The de'il had business on his hand."

                          --_Burns._



A. L. BURT COMPANY, Publishers
NEW YORK




CONTENTS


Chapter
     I.  THE ORPHAN'S TRIAL.
    II.  OLD HURRICANE STORMS.
   III.  CAP'S VISIT TO THE HIDDEN HOUSE.
    IV.  THE HIDDEN HOLLOW.
     V.  THE HIDDEN HOUSE.
    VI.  THE INMATE OF THE HIDDEN HOUSE.
   VII.  CAP'S RETURN.
  VIII.  ANOTHER MYSTERY AT THE HIDDEN HOUSE.
    IX.  CAP FREES THE CAPTIVE.
     X.  CAP IN CAPTIVITY.
    XI.  AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR AT MARAH'S COTTAGE.
   XII.  CAP "RESTS ON HER LAURELS" AND "SPOILS FOR A FIGHT."
  XIII.  BLACK DONALD.
  XIV.  GLORY.
    XV.  CAP CAPTIVATES A CRAVEN.
   XVI.  CAP'S RAGE.
  XVII.  CAPITOLA CAPS THE CLIMAX.
 XVIII.  BLACK DONALD'S LAST ATTEMPT.
   XIX.  THE AWFUL PERIL OF CAPITOLA.
    XX.  THE NEXT MORNING.
   XXI.  A FATAL HATRED.
  XXII.  THE COURT-MARTIAL.
 XXIII.  THE VERDICT.
  XXIV.  THE END OF THE WAR.
   XXV.  THE FORTUNATE BATH.
  XXVI.  THE MYSTERIOUS MANIAC.
 XXVII.  THE MANIAC'S STORY.
XXVIII.  END OF THE LADY'S STORY.
  XXIX.  PROSPECTS BRIGHTEN.
   XXX.  CAPITOLA A CAPITALIST.
  XXXI.  "THERE SHALL BE LIGHT AT THE EVENTIDE."




CAPITOLA'S PERIL.

A Sequel to THE HIDDEN HAND.




CHAPTER I.

THE ORPHAN'S TRIAL.

    "We met ere yet the world had come
      To wither up the springs of youth,
    Amid the holy joys of home,
      And in the first warm blush of youth.
    We parted as they never part,
      Whose tears are doomed to be forgot;
    Oh, by what agony of heart
      Forget me not!--forget me not!"

                          --_Anonymous._


At nine o'clock the next morning Traverse went to the library to keep
his tryst with Colonel Le Noir.

Seated in the doctor's leathern chair, with his head thrown back, his
nose erect and his white and jeweled hand caressing his mustached chin,
the colonel awaited the young man's communication.

With a slight bow Traverse took a chair and drew it up to the table,
seated himself and, after a little hesitation, commenced, and in a
modest and self-respectful manner announced that he was charged with
the last verbal instructions from the doctor to the executor of his
will.

Colonel Le Noir left off caressing his chin for an instant, and, with a
wave of his dainty hand, silently intimated that the young man should
proceed.

Traverse then began and delivered the dying directions of the late
doctor, to the effect that his daughter Clara Day should not be removed
from the paternal mansion, but that she should be suffered to remain
there, retaining as a matronly companion her old friend Mrs. Marah
Rocke.

"Umm! umm! very ingenious, upon my word!" commented the colonel, still
caressing his chin.

"I have now delivered my whole message, sir, and have only to add that
I hope, for Miss Day's sake, there will be no difficulty thrown in the
way of the execution of her father's last wishes, which are also, sir,
very decidedly her own," said Traverse.

"Umm! doubtless they are--and also yours and your worthy mother's."

"Sir, Miss Day's will in this matter is certainly mine. Apart from the
consideration of her pleasure, my wishes need not be consulted. As soon
as I have seen Miss Day made comfortable I leave for the far West,"
said Traverse, with much dignity.

"Umm! and leave mama here to guard the golden prize until your return,
eh?" sneered the colonel.

"Sir, I do not--wish to understand you," said Traverse with a flushed
brow.

"Possibly not, my excellent young friend," said the colonel,
ironically; then, rising from his chair and elevating his voice, he
cried, "but I, sir, understand you and your mother and your pretty
scheme perfectly! Very ingenious invention, these 'last verbal
instructions.' Very pretty plan to entrap an heiress; but it shall not
avail you, adventurers that you are! This afternoon Sauter, the
confidential attorney of my late brother-in-law, will be here with the
will, which shall be read in the presence of the assembled household.
If these last verbal directions are also to be found duplicated in the
will, very good, they shall be obeyed; if not, they shall be
discredited."

During this speech Traverse stood with kindling eyes and blazing
cheeks, scarcely able to master his indignation; yet, to his credit be
it spoken, he did "rule his own spirit" and replied with dignity and
calmness:

"Colonel Le Noir, my testimony in regard to the last wishes of Doctor
Day can, if necessary, be supported by other evidence--though I do not
believe that any man who did not himself act in habitual disregard of
truth would wantonly question the veracity of another."

"Sir! this to me!" exclaimed Le Noir, growing white with rage and
making a step toward the young man.

"Yes, Colonel Le Noir, that to you! And this in addition; You have
presumed to charge my mother, in connection with myself, with being an
adventuress; with forming dishonorable 'schemes,' and in so charging
her, Colonel Le Noir, you utter a falsehood!"

"Sirrah!" cried Le Noir, striding toward Traverse and raising his hand
over his head, with a fearful oath, "retract your words or----"

Traverse calmly drew himself up, folded his arms and replied coolly:

"I am no brawler, Colonel Le Noir; the pistol and the bowie-knife are
as strange to my hands as abusive epithets and profane language are to
my lips; nevertheless, instead of retracting my words, I repeat and
reiterate them. If you charge my mother with conspiracy you utter a
falsehood. As her son I am in duty bound to say as much."

"Villain!" gasped Le Noir, shaking his fist and choking with rage;
"villain! you shall repent this in every vein of your body!"

Then, seizing his hat, he strode from the room.

"Boaster!" said Traverse to himself, as he also left the library by
another door.

Clara was waiting for him in the little parlor below.

"Well, well, dear Traverse," she said, as he entered. "You have had the
explanation with my guardian, and--he makes no objection to carrying
out the last directions of my father and our own wishes--he is willing
to leave me here?"

"My dear girl, Colonel Le Noir defers all decision until the reading of
the will, which is to take place this afternoon," said Traverse,
unwilling to add to her distress by recounting the disgraceful scene
that had just taken place in the library.

"Oh! these delays! these delays! Heaven give me patience! Yet I do not
know why I should be so uneasy. It is only a form; of course he will
regard my father's wishes."

"I do not see well how he can avoid doing so, especially as Doctor
Williams is another witness to them, and I shall request the doctor's
attendance here this afternoon. Dear Clara, keep up your spirits! A few
hours now and all will be well," said Traverse, as he drew on his
gloves and took his hat to go on his morning round of calls.

An early dinner was ordered, for the purpose of giving ample time in
the afternoon for the reading of the will.

Owing to the kind forbearance of each member of this little family,
their meeting with their guest at the table was not so awkward as it
might have been rendered. Mrs. Rocke had concealed the insults that had
been offered her; Traverse had said nothing of the affronts put upon
him. So that each, having only their own private injuries to resent,
felt free in forbearing. Nothing but this sort of prudence on the part
of individuals rendered their meeting around one board possible.

While they were still at the table the attorney, Mr. Sauter, with
Doctors Williams and Dawson, arrived, and was shown into the library.

And very soon after the dessert was put upon the table the family left
it and, accompanied by Colonel Le Noir, adjourned to the library. After
the usual salutations they arranged themselves along each side of an
extension table, at the head of which the attorney placed himself.

In the midst of a profound silence the will was opened and read. It was
dated three years before.

The bulk of his estate, after the paying a few legacies, was left to
his esteemed brother-in-law, Gabriel Le Noir, in trust for his only
daughter, Clara Day, until the latter should attain the age of
twenty-one, at which period she was to come into possession of the
property. Then followed the distribution of the legacies. Among the
rest the sum of a thousand dollars was left to his young friend
Traverse Rocke, and another thousand to his esteemed neighbor Marah
Rocke. Gabriel Le Noir was appointed sole executor of the will, trustee
of the property and guardian of the heiress.

At the conclusion of the reading Mr. Sauter folded the document and
laid it upon the table.

Colonel Le Noir arose and said:

"The will of the late Doctor Day has been read in your presence. I
presume you all heard it, and that there can be no mistake as to its
purport. All that remains now is to act upon it. I shall claim the
usual privilege of twelve months before administering upon the estate
or paying the legacies. In the mean time, I shall assume the charge of
my ward's person, and convey her to my own residence, known as the
Hidden House. Mrs. Rocke," he said, turning toward the latter, "your
presence and that of your young charge is no longer required here. Be
so good as to prepare Miss Day's traveling trunks, as we set out from
this place to-morrow morning."

Mrs. Rocke started, looked wistfully in the face of the speaker and,
seeing that he was in determined earnest, turned her appealing glances
toward Traverse and Doctor Williams.

As for Clara, her face, previously blanched with grief, was now flushed
with indignation. In her sudden distress and perplexity she knew not at
once what to do--whether to utter a protest or continue silent; whether
to leave the room or remain. Her embarrassment was perceived by
Traverse, who, stooping, whispered to her:

"Be calm, love; all shall be well. Doctor Williams is about to speak."

And at that moment, indeed, Doctor Williams arose and said:

"I have, Colonel Le Noir to endorse a dying message from Doctor Day
entrusted to my young friend here to be delivered to you, to the effect
that it was his last desire and request that his daughter, Miss Clara
Day, should be permitted to reside during the term of her minority in
this her patrimonial home, under the care of her present matronly
friend, Mrs. Marah Rocke, Doctor Rocke and myself are here to bear
testimony to these, the last wishes of the departed, which wishes, I
believe, also express the desires of his heiress."

"Oh, yes, yes!" said Clara, earnestly. "I do very much desire to remain
in my own home, among my old familiar friends. My dear father only
consulted my comfort and happiness when he left these instructions."

"There can be, therefore, no reason why Miss Day should be disturbed in
her present home," said Traverse.

Colonel Le Noir smiled grimly, saying:

"I am sorry, Doctor Williams, to differ with you or to distress Miss
Day. But if, as she says, her lamented father consulted her pleasure in
those last instructions, he certainly consulted nothing else--not the
proprieties of conventionalism, the opinion of the world, nor the
future welfare of his daughter. Therefore, as a man of Doctor Day's
high position and character in his sane moments never could have made
such a singular arrangement, I am forced to the conclusion that he
could not, at the time of giving those instructions, have been in his
right mind. Consequently, I cannot venture to act upon any 'verbal
instructions,' however well attested, but shall be guided in every
respect by the will, executed while yet the testator was in sound body
and mind."

"Doctor Rocke and myself are both physicians competent to certify that,
at the time of leaving these directions, our respected friend was
perfectly sound in mind at least," said Doctor Williams.

"That, sir, I repeat, I contest. And, acting upon the authority of the
will, I shall proceed to take charge of my ward as well as of her
estate. And as I think this house, under all the circumstances, a very
improper place for her to remain, I shall convey her without delay to
my own home. Mrs. Rocke, I believe I requested you to see to the
packing of Miss Day's trunks."

"Oh, heaven! shall this wrong be permitted?" ejaculated Marah.

"Mrs. Rocke, I will not go unless absolutely forced to do so by a
decree of the court. I shall get Doctor Williams to make an appeal for
me to the Orphans' Court," said Clara, by way of encouraging her
friend.

"My dear Miss Day, that, I hope, will not be required. Colonel Le Noir
acts under a misapprehension of the circumstances. We must enter into
more explanations with him. In the mean time, my dear young lady, it is
better that you should obey him for the present, at least so far as
retiring from the room," said Doctor Williams.

Clara immediately rose and, requesting Mrs. Rocke to accompany her,
withdrew from the library.

Doctor Williams then said:

"I advised the retirement of the young lady, having a communication to
make the hearing of which in a mixed company might have cost her an
innocent blush. But first I would ask you, Colonel Le Noir, what are
those circumstances to which you allude which render Miss Day's
residence here, in her patrimonial mansion, with her old and faithful
friends, so improper?" inquired Doctor Williams, courteously.

"The growing intimacy, sir, between herself and a very objectionable
party--this young man Rocke!" replied Colonel Le Noir.

"Ah! and is that all?"

"It is enough, sir," said Colonel Le Noir, loftily.

"Then suppose I should inform you, sir, that this young man, Doctor
Rocke, was brought up and educated at Doctor Day's cost and under his
own immediate eye?"

"Then, sir, you would only inform me that an eccentric gentleman of
fortune had done--what eccentric gentlemen of fortune will sometimes
do--educated a pauper."

At this opprobrious epithet Traverse, with a flushed face, started to
his feet.

"Sit down, my boy, sit down; leave me to deal with this man," said
Doctor Williams, forcing Traverse back into his seat. Then, turning to
Colonel Le Noir, he said:

"But suppose, sir, that such was the estimation in which Doctor Day
held the moral and intellectual worth of his young protg that he
actually gave him his daughter?"

"I cannot suppose an impossibility, Doctor Williams," replied Colonel
Le Noir, haughtily.

"Then, sir, I have the pleasure of startling you a little by a prodigy
that you denominate an impossibility! Clara Day and Traverse Rocke were
betrothed with full knowledge and cordial approbation of the young
lady's father."

"Impossible! preposterous! I shall countenance no such ridiculous
absurdity!" said Colonel Le Noir, growing red in the face.

"Miss Day, Doctor Rocke, Mrs. Rocke, and myself are witnesses to that
fact."

"The young lady and the young man are parties immediately concerned--they
cannot be received as witnesses in their own case; Mrs. Rocke is too much
in their interest for her evidence to be taken; you, sir, I consider the
dupe of these cunning conspirators--mother and son," replied Colonel Le
Noir, firmly.

"Tut!" said Doctor Williams, almost out of patience. "I do not depend
upon the words of Miss Day and her friends, although I hold their
veracity to be above question; I had Doctor Day's dying words to the
same effect. And he mentioned the existing betrothal as the very reason
why Clara should remain here in the care of her future mother-in-law."

"Then, sir, that the doctor should have spoken and acted thus, is only
another and a stronger reason for believing him to have been deranged
in his last moments! You need give yourself no farther trouble! I shall
act upon the authority of this instrument which I hold in my hand,"
replied Colonel Le Noir, haughtily.

"Then, as the depository of the dying man's last wishes and as the next
friend of his injured daughter, I shall make an appeal to the Orphans'
Court," said Doctor Williams, coldly.

"You can do as you please about that; but in the mean time, acting upon
the authority of the will, I shall to-morrow morning set out with my
ward for my own home."

"There may be time to arrest that journey," said Doctor Williams,
arising and taking his hat to go.

In the passage he met Mrs. Rocke.

"Dear Doctor Williams," said Mrs. Rocke, earnestly, "pray come up to
poor Clara's room and speak to her, if you can possibly say anything to
comfort her; she is weeping herself into a fit of illness at the bare
thought of being, so soon after her dreadful bereavement, torn away
from her home and friends."

"Tut! tut! no use in weeping! all will yet be right."

"You have persuaded that man to permit her to remain here, then?" said
Marah, gladly.

"Persuaded him! no, nor even undertaken to do so! I never saw him
before to-day, yet I would venture to say, from what I have now seen of
him, that he never was persuaded by any agent except his own passions
and interests, to any act whatever. No, I have endeavored to show him
that we have law as well as justice on our side, and even now I am
afraid I shall have to take the case before the Orphans' Court before I
can convince him. He purposes removing Clara to-morrow morning. I will
endeavor to see the Judge of the Orphans' Court to-night, take out a
habeas corpus, ordering Le Noir to bring his ward into court, and serve
it on him as he passes through Staunton on his way home."

"But is there no way of preventing him from taking Clara away from the
house to-morrow morning."

"No good way. No, madam, it is best that all things should be done
decently and in order. I advise you, as I shall also advise my young
friends, Traverse and Clara, not to injure their own cause by unwise
impatience or opposition. We should go before the Orphans' Court with
the very best aspect."

"Come, then, and talk to Clara. She has the most painful antipathy to
the man who claims the custody of her person, as well as the most
distressing reluctance to leaving her dear home and friends; and all
this, in addition to her recent heavy affliction, almost overwhelms the
poor child," said Mrs. Rocke, weeping.

"I will go at once and do what I can to soothe her," said Doctor
Williams, following Mrs. Rocke, who led him up to Clara's room.

They found her prostrate upon her bed, crushed with grief.

"Come, come, my dear girl, this is too bad! It is not like the usual
noble fortitude of our Clara," said the old man, kindly taking her
hand.

"Oh, Doctor, forgive--forgive me! but my courage must have been very
small, for I fear it is all gone. But then, indeed, everything comes on
me at once. My dear, dear father's death; then the approaching
departure and expected long absence of Traverse! All that was grievous
enough to bear; and now to be torn away from the home of my childhood,
and from the friend that has always been a mother to me, and by a man,
from whom every true, good instinct of my nature teaches me to shrink.
I, who have always had full liberty in the house of my dear father, to
be forced away against my will by this man, as if I were his slave!"
exclaimed Clara, bursting into fresh tears of indignation and grief.

"Clara, my dear, dear girl, this impatience and rebellion is so unlike
your gentle nature that I can scarcely recognize you for the mild and
dignified daughter of my old friend. Clara, if the saints in heaven
could grieve at anything, I should think your dear father would be
grieved to see you thus!" said the old man in gentle rebuke that
immediately took effect upon the meek and conscientious maiden.

"Oh! I feel--I feel that I am doing very wrong, but I cannot help it. I
scarcely know myself in this agony of mingled grief, indignation and
terror--yes, terror--for every instinct of my nature teaches me to
distrust and fear that man, in whom my father must have been greatly
deceived before he could have entrusted him with the guardianship of
his only child."

"I think that quite likely," said the old man; "yet, my dear, even in
respect to your dear father's memory, you must try to bear this trial
patiently."

"Oh, yes, I know I must. Dear father, if you can look down and see me
now, forgive your poor Clara, her anger and her impatience. She will
try to be worthy of the rearing you have given her and to bear even
this great trial with the spirit worthy of your daughter!" said Clara
within her own heart; then, speaking up, she said: "You shall have no
more reason to reprove me, Doctor Williams."

"That is my brave girl! That is my dear Clara Day! And now, when your
guardian directs you to prepare yourself for your journey, obey him--go
with him without making any objection. I purpose to arrest your journey
at Staunton with a habeas corpus that he dare not resist, and which
shall compel him to bring you into the Orphans' Court. There our side
shall be heard, and the decision will rest with the judge."

"And all will be well! Oh, say that, sir! to give me the courage to act
with becoming docility," pleaded Clara.

"I have not a doubt in this world that it will all be right, for,
however Colonel Le Noir may choose to disregard the last wishes of your
father, as attested by myself and young Rocke, I have not the least
idea that the judge will pass them over. On the contrary, I feel
persuaded that he will confirm them by sending you back here to your
beloved home."

"Oh, may heaven grant it!" said Clara. "You do, indeed, give me new
life."

"Yes, yes, be cheerful, my dear; trust in Providence and expect nothing
short of the best! And now I dare not tarry longer with you, for I must
see the Judge at his house this night. Good-by, my dear; keep up a good
heart!" said the old man cheerfully, pressing her hand and taking his
leave.

Mrs. Rocke accompanied him to the hall door.

"My dear madam, keep up your spirits also for the sake of your young
charge! Make her go to bed early! To-morrow, when she thinks she is
about to be torn from you forever, remind her in her ear that I shall
meet the carriage at Staunton with a power that shall turn the horses'
heads."

And so saying, the worthy old gentleman departed.

As Marah Rocke looked after him, she also saw with alarm that Colonel
Le Noir had mounted his horse and galloped off in the direction of
Staunton, as if impelled by the most urgent haste.

She returned to the bedside of Clara, and left her no more that night.
As the colonel did not return to supper, they, the family party, had
their tea in Clara's room.

Late at night Mrs. Rocke heard Colonel Le Noir come into the house and
enter his chamber.

Poor Clara slept no more that night; anxiety, despite of all her
efforts, kept her wide awake. Yet, though anxious and wakeful, yet by
prayer and endeavor she had brought her mind into a patient and
submissive mood, so that when a servant knocked at her door in the
morning with a message from Colonel Le Noir that she should be ready to
set forth immediately after breakfast, she replied that she should obey
him, and without delay she arose and commenced her toilet.

All the family met for the last time around the board. The party was
constrained. The meal was a gloomy one. On rising from the table
Colonel Le Noir informed his ward that his traveling carriage was
waiting, and that her baggage was already on, and requested her to put
on her bonnet and mantle, and take leave of her servants.

Clara turned to obey--Traverse went to her side and whispered:

"Take courage, dear love. My horse is saddled. I shall ride in
attendance upon the carriage whether that man likes it or not; nor lose
sight of you for one moment until we meet Williams with his habeas
corpus."

"Nor even then, dear Traverse, nor even then! You will attend me to the
court and be ready to take me back to this dear, dear home!" murmured
Clara in reply.

"Yes, yes, dear girl! There, be cheerful," whispered the young man, as
he pressed her hand and released it.

Colonel Le Noir had been a silent but frowning spectator of this little
scene, and now that Clara was leaving the room, attended by Mrs. Rocke,
he called the latter back, saying:

"You will be so kind as to stop here a moment, Mrs. Rocke and you also,
young man."

The mother and son paused to hear what he should have to say.

"I believe it is the custom here in discharging domestics to give a
month's warning, or in lieu of that, to pay a month's wages in advance.
There, woman, is the money. You will oblige me by leaving the house
to-day, together with your son and all your other trumpery, as the
premises are put in charge of an agent, who will be here this
afternoon, clothed with authority to eject all loiterers and
intruders."

While the colonel spoke Marah Rocke gazed at him in a panic from which
she seemed unable to rouse herself, until Traverse gravely took her
hand, saying:

"My dear mother, let me conduct you from the presence of this man, who
does not know how to behave himself toward women. Leave me to talk with
him, and do you, dear mother, go to Miss Day, who I know is waiting for
you."

Marah Rocke mechanically complied and allowed Traverse to lead her from
the room.

When he returned he went up to Colonel Le Noir, and, standing before
him and looking him full and sternly in the face, said, as sternly:

"Colonel Le Noir, my mother will remain here and abide the decision of
the Orphans' Court; until that has been pronounced, she does not stir
at your or any man's bidding!"

"Villain, out of my way!" sneered Le Noir, endeavoring to pass him.

Traverse prevented him, saying:

"Sir, in consideration of your age, which should be venerable, your
position which should prove you honorable, and of this sacred house of
mourning in which you stand, I have endeavored to meet all the insults
you have offered me with forbearance. But, sir, I am here to defend my
mother's rights and to protect her from insult! And I tell you plainly
that you have affronted her for the very last time! One more word or
look of insult leveled at Marah Rocke and neither your age, position
nor this sacred roof shall protect you from personal chastisement at
the hands of her son!"

Le Noir, who had listened in angry scorn, with many an ejaculation of
contempt, now at the conclusion which so galled his pride, broke out
furiously, with:

"Sir, you are a bully! If you were a gentleman I would call you out!"

"And I should not come if you did, sir! Dueling is unchristian,
barbarous and abominable in the sight of God and all good men. For the
rest you may call me anything you please; but do not again insult my
mother, for if you do I shall hold it a Christian duty to teach you
better manners," said Traverse, coolly taking his hat and walking from
the room. He mounted his horse and stood ready to attend Clara to
Staunton.

Colonel Le Noir ground his teeth in impotent rage, muttering:

"Take care, young man! I shall live to be revenged upon you yet for
these affronts!" and his dastard heart burned with the fiercer
malignity that he had not dared to meet the eagle eye, or encounter the
strong arm of the upright and stalwart young man. Gnashing his teeth
with ill-suppressed fury, he strode into the hall just as Mrs. Rocke
and Clara, in her traveling dress, descended the stairs.

Clara threw her arms around Mrs. Rocke's neck, and, weeping, said:

"Good-by, dear, best friend--good-by! Heaven grant it may not be for
long! Oh, pray for me, that I may be sent back to you!"

"May the Lord have you in His holy keeping, my child! I shall pray
until I hear from you!" said Marah, kissing and releasing her.

Colonel Le Noir then took her by the hand, led her out, and put her
into the carriage.

Just before entering Clara had turned to take a last look at her old
home--all, friends and servants, noticed the sorrowful, anxious, almost
despairing look of her pale face, which seemed to ask:

"Ah, shall I ever, ever return to you, dear old home, and dear,
familiar friends?"

In another instant she had disappeared within the carriage, which
immediately rolled off.

As the carriage was heavily laden, and the road was in a very bad
condition, it was a full hour before they reached the town of Staunton.
As the carriage drew up for a few moments before the door of the
principal hotel, and Colonel Le Noir was in the act of stepping out, a
sheriff's officer, accompanied by Dr. Williams, approached, and served
upon the colonel a writ of habeas corpus, commanding him to bring his
ward, Clara Day, into court.

Colonel Le Noir laughed scornfully, saying:

"And do any of you imagine this will serve your purposes? Ha, ha! The
most that it can do will be to delay my journey for a few hours until
the decision of the judge, which will only serve to confirm my
authority beyond all future possibility of questioning."

"We will see to that," said Doctor Williams.

"Drive to the Court House!" ordered Colonel Le Noir.

And the carriage, attended by Traverse Rocke, Doctor Williams and the
Sheriff's officer, each on horseback, drove thither.

And now, reader, I will not trouble you with a detailed account of this
trial. Clara, clothed in deep mourning, and looking pale and terrified,
was led into the court room on the arm of her guardian. She was
followed closely by her friends, Traverse Rocke and Doctor Williams,
each of whom whispered encouraging words to the orphan.

As the court had no pressing business on its hands, the case was
immediately taken up, the will was read and attested by the attorney
who had drawn it up and the witnesses who had signed it. Then the
evidence of Doctor Williams and Doctor Rocke was taken concerning the
last verbal instructions of the deceased. The case occupied about three
hours, at the end of which the judge gave a decision in favor of
Colonel Le Noir.

This judgment carried consternation to the heart of Clara and of all
her friends.

Clara herself sank fainting in the arms of her old friend, the
venerable Doctor Williams.

Traverse, in bitterness of spirit, approached and bent over her.

Colonel Le Noir spoke to the judge.

"I deeply thank your honor for the prompt hearing and equally prompt
decision of this case, and I will beg your honor to order the Sheriff
and his officers to see your judgment carried into effect, as I foresee
violent opposition, and wish to prevent trouble."

"Certainly. Mr. Sheriff, you will see that Colonel Le Noir is put in
possession of his ward, and protected in that right until he shall have
placed her in security," said the judge.

Clara, on hearing these words, lifted her head from the old man's
bosom, nerved her gentle heart, and in a clear, sweet, steady voice
said:

"It is needless precaution, your honor; my friends are no law-breakers,
and since the court has given me into the custody of my guardian, I do
not dispute its judgment. I yield myself up to Colonel Le Noir."

"You do well, young lady," said the judge.

"I am pleased, Miss Day, to see that you understand and perform your
duty; believe me, I shall do all that I can to make you happy," said
Colonel Le Noir.

Clara replied by a gentle nod, and then, with a slight blush mantling
her pure cheeks she advanced a step and placed herself immediately in
front of the judge, saying:

"But there is a word that I would speak to your honor."

"Say on, young lady," said the judge.

And as she stood there in her deep mourning dress, with her fair hair
unbound and floating softly around her pale, sweet face, every eye in
that court was spellbound by her almost unearthly beauty. Before
proceeding with what she was about to say, she turned upon Traverse a
look that brought him immediately to her side.

"Your honor," she began, in a low, sweet, clear tone, "I owe it to
Doctor Rocke here present, who has been sadly misrepresented to you, to
say (what, under less serious circumstances, my girl's heart would
shrink from avowing so publicly) that I am his betrothed wife--sacredly
betrothed to him by almost the last act of my dear father's life. I
hold this engagement to be so holy that no earthly tribunal can break
or disturb it. And while I bend to your honor's decision, and yield
myself to the custody of my legal guardian for the period of my
minority, I here declare to all who may be interested, that I hold my
hand and heart irrevocably pledged to Doctor Rocke, and that, as his
betrothed wife, I shall consider myself bound to correspond with him
regularly, and to receive him as often as he shall seek my society,
until my majority, when I and all that I possess will become his own.
And these words I force myself to speak, your honor, both in justice to
my dear lost father and his friend, Traverse Rocke, and also to myself,
that hereafter no one may venture to accuse me of clandestine
proceedings, or distort my actions into improprieties, or in any manner
call in question the conduct of my father's daughter." And, with
another gentle bow, Clara retired to the side of her old friend.

"You are likely to have a troublesome charge in your ward," said the
sheriff apart to the colonel, who shrugged his shoulders by way of
reply.

The heart of Traverse was torn by many conflicting passions, emotions
and impulses; there was indignation at the decision of the court; grief
for the loss of Clara, and dread for her future!

One instant he felt a temptation to denounce the guardian as a villain
and to charge the judge with being a corrupt politician, whose
decisions were swayed by party interests!

The next moment he felt an impulse to catch Clara up in his arms, fight
his way through the crowd and carry her off! But all these wild
emotions, passions and impulses he succeeded in controlling.

Too well he knew that to rage, do violence, or commit extravagance as
he might, the law would take its course all the same.

While his heart was torn in this manner, Colonel Le Noire was urging
the departure of his ward. And Clara came to her lover's side and said,
gravely and sweetly:

"The law, you see, has decided against us, dear Traverse. Let us bend
gracefully to a decree that we cannot annul! It cannot, at least, alter
our sacred relations; nor can anything on earth shake our steadfast
faith in each other; let us take comfort in that, and in the thought
that the years will surely roll round at length and bring the time that
shall reunite us."

"Oh, my angel-girl! My angel-girl! Your patient heroism puts me to the
blush, for my heart is crushed in my bosom and my firmness quite gone!"
said Traverse, in a broken voice.

"You will gain firmness, dear Traverse. 'Patient!' I patient! You
should have heard me last night! I was so impatient that Doctor
Williams had to lecture me. But it would be strange if one did not
learn something by suffering. I have been trying all night and day to
school my heart to submission, and I hope I have succeeded, Traverse.
Bless me and bid me good-by."

"The Lord forever bless and keep you, my own dear angel, Clara!" burst
from the lips of Traverse. "The Lord abundantly bless you!"

"And you," said Clara.

"Good-by!--good-by!"

"Good-by!"

And thus they parted.

Clara was hurried away and put into the carriage by her guardian.

Ah, no one but the Lord knew how much it had cost that poor girl to
maintain her fortitude during that trying scene. She had controlled
herself for the sake of her friends. But now, when she found herself in
the carriage, her long strained nerves gave way--she sank exhausted and
prostrated into the corner of her seat, in the utter collapse of woe!

But leaving the travelers to pursue their journey, we must go back to
Traverse.

Almost broken-hearted, Traverse returned to Willow Heights to convey
the sad tidings of his disappointment to his mother's ear.

Marah Rocke was so overwhelmed with grief at the news that she was for
several hours incapable of action.

The arrival of the house agent was the first event that recalled her to
her senses.

She aroused herself to action, and, assisted by Traverse, set to work
to pack up her own and his wardrobe and other personal effects.

And the next morning Marah Rocke was re-established in her cottage.

And the next week, having equally divided their little capital, the
mother and son parted--Traverse, by her express desire, keeping to his
original plan, set out for the far West.




CHAPTER II.

OLD HURRICANE STORMS.

    "At this sir knight flamed up with ire!
    His great chest heaved! his eyes flashed fire.
    The crimson that suffused his face
    To deepest purple now gave place."


Who can describe the frenzy of Old Hurricane upon discovering the fraud
that had been practised upon him by Black Donald?

It was told him the next morning in his tent, at his breakfast table,
in the presence of his assembled family, by the Rev. Mr. Goodwin.

Upon first hearing it, he was incapable of anything but blank staring,
until it seemed as though his eyes must start from their sockets!

Then his passion, "not loud but deep," found utterance only in emphatic
thumps of his walking stick upon the ground!

Then, as the huge emotion worked upward, it broke out in grunts, groans
and inarticulate exclamations!

Finally it burst forth as follows:

"Ugh! ugh! ugh! Fool! dolt! blockhead! Brute that I've been! I wish
somebody would punch my wooden head! I didn't think the demon himself
could have deceived me so! Ugh! Nobody but the demon could have done
it! and he is the demon! The very demon himself! He does not
disguise--he transforms himself! Ugh! ugh! ugh! that I should have been
such a donkey!"

"Sir, compose yourself! We are all liable to suffer deception," said
Mr. Goodwin.

"Sir," broke forth Old Hurricane, in fury, "that wretch has eaten at my
table! Has drunk wine with me!! Has slept in my bed!!! Ugh! ugh!!
ugh!!!"

"Believing him to be what he seemed, sir, you extended to him the
rights of hospitality; you have nothing to blame yourself with!"

"Demmy, sir, I did more than that! I've coddled him up with negusses!
I've pampered him up with possets and put him to sleep in my own bed!
Yes, sir--and more! Look there at Mrs. Condiment, sir! The way in which
she worshiped that villain was a sight to behold!" said Old Hurricane,
jumping up and stamping around the tent in fury.

"Oh, Mr. Goodwin, sir, how could I help it when I thought he was such a
precious saint?" whimpered the old lady.

"Yes, sir! when 'his reverence' would be tired with delivering a
long-winded mid-day discourse, Mrs. Condiment, sir, would take him into
her own tent--make him lie down on her own sacred cot, and set my niece
to bathing his head with cologne and her maid to fanning him, while she
herself prepared an iced sherry cobbler for his reverence! Aren't you
ashamed of yourself, Mrs. Condiment, mum!" said Old Hurricane, suddenly
stopping before the poor old woman, in angry scorn.

"Indeed, I'm sure if I'd known it was Black Donald, I'd no more have
suffered him inside of my tent than I would Satan!"

"Demmy, mum, you had Satan there as well! Who but Satan could have
tempted you all to disregard me, your lawful lord and master, as you
every one of you did for that wretch's sake! Hang it, parson, I wasn't
the master of my own house, nor head of my own family! Precious Father
Gray was! Black Donald was! Oh, you shall hear!" cried Old Hurricane,
in a frenzy.

"Pray, sir, be patient and do not blame the women for being no wiser
than you were yourself," said Mr. Goodwin.

"Tah! tah! tah! One act of folly is a contingency to which any man may
for once in his life be liable; but folly is the women's normal condition!
You shall hear! You shall hear! Hang it, sir, everybody had to give way
to Father Gray! Everything was for Father Gray! Precious Father Gray!
Excellent Father Gray! Saintly Father Gray! It was Father Gray here and
Father Gray there, and Father Gray everywhere and always! He ate with
us all day and slept with us all night! The coolest cot in the dryest
nook of the tent at night--the shadiest seat at the table by day--were
always for his reverence! The nicest tit-bits of the choicest dishes--the
middle slices of the fish, the breast of the young ducks, and the wings
of the chickens, the mealiest potatoes, the juiciest tomatoes, the
tenderest roasting ear, the most delicate custard, and freshest fruit
always for his reverence! I had to put up with the necks of poultry,
and the tails of fishes, watery potatoes, specked apples and scorched
custards--and if I dared to touch anything better before his precious
reverence had eaten and was filled, Mrs. Condiment--there--would look
as sour as if she had bitten an unripe lemon--and Cap would tread on my
gouty toe! Mrs. Condiment, mum, I don't know how you can look me in the
face!" said Old Hurricane, savagely. A very unnecessary reproach, since
poor Mrs. Condiment had not ventured to look any one in the face since
the discovery of the fraud of which she, as well as others, had been an
innocent victim.

"Come, come, my dear major, there is no harm done to you or your
family; therefore, take patience!" said Mr. Goodwin.

"Demmy, sir, I beg you pardon, parson, I won't take patience! You don't
know! Hang it, man, at last they got me to give up one-half of my own
blessed bed to his precious reverence--the best half which the fellow
always took right out of the middle, leaving me to sleep on both sides
of him, if I could! Think of it--me, Ira Warfield--sleeping between the
sheets--night after night--with Black Donald! Ugh! ugh! ugh! Oh, for
some lethean draught that I might drink and forget! Sir, I won't be
patient! Patience would be a sin! Mrs. Condiment, mum, I desire that
you will send in your account and supply yourself with a new situation!
You and I cannot agree any longer. You'll be putting me to bed with
Beelzebub next!" exclaimed Old Hurricane, besides himself with
indignation.

Mrs. Condiment sighed and wiped her eyes under her spectacles.

The worthy minister, now seriously alarmed, came to him and said:

"My dear, dear major, do not be unjust--consider. She is an old
faithful domestic, who has been in your service forty years--whom you
could not live without! I say it under advisement--whom you could not
live without!"

"Hang it, sir, nor live with! Think of her helping to free the
prisoners! Actually taking Black Donald--precious Father Gray!--into
their cell and leaving them together to hatch their--beg you
pardon--horrid plots!"

"But, sir, instead of punishing the innocent victim of his deception,
let us be merciful and thank the Lord, that since those men were
delivered from prison, they were freed without bloodshed; for remember
that neither the warden nor any of his men, nor any one else has been
personally injured."

"Hang it, sir, I wish they had cut all our throats to teach us more
discretion!" broke forth Old Hurricane.

"I am afraid that the lesson so taught would have come too late to be
useful!" smiled the pastor.

"Well, it hasn't come too late now! Mrs. Condiment, mum, mind what I
tell you! As soon as we return to Hurricane Hall, send in your accounts
and seek a new home! I am not going to suffer myself to be set at
naught any longer!" exclaimed Old Hurricane, bringing down his cane
with an emphatic thump.

The sorely troubled minister was again about to interfere, when, as the
worm if trodden upon, will turn, Mrs. Condiment herself spoke up,
saying:

"Lor, Major Warfield, sir, there were others deceived besides me, and
as for myself, I never can think of the risk I've run without growing
cold all over!"

"Serves you right, mum, for your officiousness, and obsequiousness and
toadying to--precious Mr. Gray!--serves you doubly right for famishing
me at my own table!"

"Uncle!" said Capitola, "'Honor bright! Fair play is a jewel!' If you
and I, who have seen Black Donald before, failed to recognize that
stalwart athlete in a seemingly old and sickly man, how could you
expect Mrs. Condiment to do so, who never saw him but once in her life,
and then was so much frightened that she instantly fainted?"

"Pah! pah! pah! Cap, hush! You, all of you, disgust me, except Black
Donald! I begin to respect him! Confound if I don't take in all the
offers I have made for his apprehension, and at the very next
convention of our party I'll nominate him to represent us in the
National Congress; for, of all the fools that ever I have met in my
life, the people of this county are the greatest! And fools should at
least be represented by one clever man--and Black Donald is the very
fellow! He is decidedly the ablest man in this congressional district."

"Except yourself, dear uncle!" said Capitola.

"Except nobody, Miss Impudence!--least of all me! The experience of the
last week has convinced me that I ought to have a cap and bells awarded
me by public acclamation!" said Old Hurricane, stamping about in fury.

The good minister finding that he could make no sort of impression upon
the irate old man, soon took his leave, telling Mrs. Condiment that if
he could be of any service to her in her trouble she must be sure to
let him know.

At this Capitola and Mrs. Condiment exchanged looks, and the old lady,
thanking him for his kindness, said that if it should become necessary,
she should gratefully avail herself of it.

That day the camp meeting broke up.

Major Warfield struck tents and with his family and baggage returned to
Hurricane Hall.

On their arrival, each member of the party went about his or her own
particular business.

Capitola hurried to her own room to take off her bonnet and shawl.
Pitapat, before attending her young mistress, lingered below to
astonish the housemaids with accounts of "Brack Donel, dress up like an
ole parson, an' 'ceiving everybody, even ole Marse!"

Mrs. Condiment went to her store room to inspect the condition of her
newly put up preserves and pickles, lest any of them should have
"worked" during her absence.

And Old Hurricane, attended by Wool, walked down to his kennels and his
stables to look after the well-being of his favorite hounds and horses.
It was while going through this interesting investigation that Major
Warfield was informed--principally by overhearing the gossip of the
grooms with Wool--of the appearance of a new inmate of the Hidden
House--a young girl, who, according to their description, must have
been the very pearl of beauty.

Old Hurricane pricked up his ears! Anything relating to the "Hidden
House" possessed immense interest for him.

"Who is she, John?" he inquired of the groom.

"'Deed I dunno, sir, only they say she's a bootiful young creature,
fair as any lily, and dressed in deep mourning."

"Humph! humph! humph! another victim! Ten thousand chances to one,
another victim! who told you this, John?"

"Why, Marse, you see Tom Griffith, the Rev. Mr. Goodwin's man, he's
very thick long of Davy Hughs, Colonel Le Noir's coachman. And Davy he
told Tom how one day last month his marse ordered the carriage, and
went two or three days' journey up the country beyant Staunton, there
he stayed a week and then came home, fetching along with him in the
carriage this lovely young lady, who was dressed in the deepest
mourning, and wept all the way. They 'spects how she's an orphan, and
has lost all her friends, by the way she takes on."

"Another victim! My life on it--another victim! Poor child! She had
better be dead than in the power of that atrocious villain and
consummate hypocrite!" said Old Hurricane, passing on to the
examination of his favorite horses, one of which, the swiftest in the
stud, he found galled on the shoulders. Whereupon he flew into a
towering passion, abusing his unfortunate groom by every opprobrious
epithet blind fury could suggest, ordering him, as he valued whole
bones, to vacate the stable instantly, and never dare to set foot on
his premises again as he valued his life, an order which the man meekly
accepted and immediately disobeyed, muttered to himself:

"Humph! If we took ole marse at his word, there'd never be man or 'oman
left on the 'state," knowing full well that his tempestuous old master
would probably forget all about it, as soon as he got comfortably
seated at the supper table of Hurricane Hall, toward which the old man
now trotted off.

Not a word did Major Warfield say at supper in regard to the new inmate
of the Hidden House, for he had particular reasons for keeping Cap in
ignorance of a neighbor, lest she should insist upon exchanging visits
and being "sociable."

But it was destined that Capitola should not remain a day in ignorance
of the interesting fact.

That night, when she retired to her chamber, Pitapat lingered behind,
but presently appeared at her young mistress's room door with a large
waiter on her head, laden with meat, pastry, jelly and fruit, which she
brought in and placed upon the work stand.

"Why, what on the face of earth do you mean by bringing all that load
of victuals into my room to-night? Do you think I am an ostrich or a
cormorant, or that I am going to entertain a party of friends?" asked
Capitola, in astonishment, turning from the wash stand, where she stood
bathing her face.

"'Deed I dunno, Miss, whedder you'se an ostrizant or not, but I knows I
don't 'tend for to be 'bused any more 'bout wittels, arter findin' out
how cross empty people can be! Dar dey is! You can eat um or leab um
alone, Miss Caterpillar!" said little Pitapat, firmly.

Capitola laughed. "Patty" she said, "you are worthy to be called my
waiting maid!"

"And Lors knows, Miss Caterpillar, if it was de wittels you was
a-frettin' arter, you ought to a-told me before! Lors knows dere's
wittels enough!"

"Yes, I'm much obliged to you, Patty, but now I am not hungry, and I do
not like the smell of food in my bedroom, so take the waiter out and
set it on the passage table until morning."

Patty obeyed, and came back smiling and saying:

"Miss Caterpillar, has you hern de news?"

"What news, Pat?"

"How us has got a new neighbor--a bootiful young gal--as bootiful as a
picter in a gilt-edged Christmas book--wid a snowy skin, and sky-blue
eyes and glistenin' goldy hair, like the princess you was a readin' me
about, all in deep mournin' and a weepin' and a weepin' all alone down
there in that wicked, lonesome, onlawful ole haunted place, the Hidden
House, along of old Colonel Le Noir and old Dorkey Knight, and the
ghost as draws people's curtains of a night, just for all de worl' like
dat same princess in de ogre's castle!"

"What on earth is all this rigmarole about? Are you dreaming or
romancing?"

"I'm a-telling on you de bressed trufe! Dere's a young lady a-livin at
de Hidden House!"

"Eh? Is that really true, Patty?"

"True as preaching, miss."

"Then, I am very glad of it! I shall certainly ride over and call on
the stranger," said Capitola, gaily.

"Oh, Miss Cap! Oh, miss, don't you do no sich thing! Ole Marse kill me!
I heerd him t'reaten all de men and maids how if dey telled you
anything 'bout de new neighbor, how he'd skin dem alive!"

"Won't he skin you?" asked Cap.

"No, miss, not 'less you 'form ag'in me, 'case he didn't tell me not to
tell you, 'case you see he didn't think how I knowed! But, leastways, I
know from what I heard, ole marse wouldn't have you to know nothin'
about it, no, not for de whole worl'."

"He does not want me to call at the Hidden House! That's it! Now why
doesn't he wish me to call there? I shall have to go in order to find
out, and so I will," thought Cap.




CHAPTER III.

CAP'S VISIT TO THE HIDDEN HOUSE.

    And such a night "she" took the road in
    As ne'er poor sinner was abroad in.
    The wind blew as 'twad blawn its last
    The rattling showers rose on the blast;
    The speedy gleams the darkness swallowed;
    Loud, deep and long the thunder bellowed;
    That night a child might understand
    The de'il had business on his hand.

                          --Burns.


A week passed before Capitola carried her resolution of calling upon
the inmate of the Hidden House into effect. It was in fact a hot, dry,
oppressive season, the last few days of August, when all people, even
the restless Capitola, preferred the coolness and repose of indoors.
But that she should stay at home more than a week was a moral and
physical impossibility. So on Thursday afternoon, when Major Warfield
set out on horseback to visit his mill, Capitola ordered her horse
saddled and brought up that she might take an afternoon's ride.

"Now please, my dear child, don't go far," said Mrs. Condiment, "for
besides that your uncle does not approve of your riding alone, you must
hurry back to avoid the storm."

"Storm, Mrs. Condiment, why bless your dear old heart, there has not
been a storm these four weeks!" said Capitola, almost indignant that
such an absurd objection to a long ride should be raised.

"The more reason, my child, that we should have a very severe one when
it does come, and I think it will be upon us before sunset; so I advise
you to hurry home."

"Why, Mrs. Condiment, there's not a cloud in the sky."

"So much the worse, my dear! The blackest cloud that ever gathered is
not so ominous of mischief as this dull, coppery sky and still
atmosphere! And if forty years' observation of weather signs goes for
anything, I tell you that we are going to have the awfulest storm that
ever gathered in the heavens! Why, look out of that window--the very
birds and beasts know it, and instinctively seek shelter--look at that
flock of crows flying home! See how the dumb beasts come trooping
toward their sheds! Capitola, you had better give up going altogether,
my dear!"

"There! I thought all this talk tended to keeping me within doors, but
I can't stay, Mrs. Condiment! Good Mrs. Condiment, I can't!"

"But, my dear, if you should be caught out in the storm!"

"Why, I don't know but I should like it! What harm could it do? I'm not
soluble in water--rain won't melt me away! I think upon the whole I
rather prefer being caught in the storm," said Cap, perversely.

"Well, well, there is no need of that! You may ride as far as the
river's bank and back again in time to escape, if you choose!" said
Mrs. Condiment, who saw that her troublesome charge was bent upon the
frolic.

And Cap, seeing her horse approach, led by one of the grooms, ran
up-stairs, donned her riding habit, hat and gloves, ran down again,
sprang into her saddle and was off, galloping away toward the river
before Mrs. Condiment could add another word of warning.

She had been gone about an hour, when the sky suddenly darkened, the
wind rose and the thunder rolled in prelude to the storm.

Major Warfield came skurrying home from the mill, grasping his bridle
with one hand and holding his hat on with the other.

Meeting poor old Ezy in the shrubbery, he stormed out upon him with:

"What are you lounging there for, you old idiot! You old sky-gazing
lunatic! Don't you see that we are going to have an awful blow! Begone
with you and see that the cattle are all under shelter! Off, I say,
or," he rode toward Bill Ezy, but the old man, exclaiming:

"Yes, sir--yes, sir! In coorse, sir!" ducked his head and ran off in
good time.

Major Warfield quickened his horse's steps and rode to the house,
dismounted and threw the reins to the stable boy, exclaiming:

"My beast is dripping with perspiration--rub him down well, you knave,
or I'll impale you!"

Striding into the hall, he threw down his riding whip, pulled off his
gloves and called:

"Wool! Wool, you scoundrel, close every door and window in the house!
Call all the servants together in the dining-room; we're going to have
one of the worst tempests that ever raised!"

Wool flew to do his bidding.

"Mrs. Condiment, mum," said the old man, striding into the
sitting-room, "Mrs. Condiment, mum, tell Miss Black to come down from
her room until the storm is over; the upper chambers of this old house
are not safe in a tempest. Well, mum, why don't you go, or send
Pitapat?"

"Major Warfield, sir, I'm very sorry, but Miss Black has not come in
yet," said Mrs. Condiment, who for the last half hour had suffered
extreme anxiety upon account of Capitola.

"Not come in yet! Demmy, mum! Do you tell me she has gone out?" cried
Old Hurricane, in a voice of thunder, gathering his brows into a dark
frown, and striking his cane angrily upon the floor.

"Yes, sir, I am sorry to say she rode out about an hour ago and has not
returned," said Mrs. Condiment, summoning all her firmness to meet Old
Hurricane's 'roused wrath."

"Ma'am! You venture to stand there before my face and tell me
composedly that you permitted Miss Black to go off alone in the face of
such a storm as this?" roared Old Hurricane.

"Sir, I could not help it!" said the old lady.

"Demmy, mum! You should have helped it! A woman of your age to stand
there and tell me that she could not prevent a young creature like
Capitola from going out alone in the storm!"

"Major Warfield, could you have done it?"

"Me? Demmy, I should think so; but that is not the question! You----"

He was interrupted by a blinding flash of lightning, followed
immediately by an awful peal of thunder and a sudden fall of rain.

Old Hurricane sprang up as though he had been shot off his chair and
trotted up and down the floor exclaiming:

"And she--she out in all this storm! Mrs. Condiment, mum, you deserve
to be ducked! Yes, mum, you do! Wool! Wool! you diabolical villain!"

"Yes, marse, yes, sir, here I is!" exclaimed that officer, in
trepidation, as he appeared in the doorway. "De windows and doors, sir,
is all fastened close and de maids are all in the dining-room as you
ordered, and----"

"Hang the maids and the doors and windows, too! Who the demon cares
about them? How dared you, you knave, permit your young mistress to
ride, unattended, in the face of such a storm, too! Why didn't you go
with her, sir?"

"'Deed, marse----"

"Don't ''deed marse' me you atrocious villain! Saddle a horse quickly,
inquire which road your mistress took and follow and attend her home
safely--after which I intend to break every bone in your skin, sirrah!
So----"

Again he was interrupted by a dazzling flash of lightning, accompanied
by a deafening roll of thunder, and followed by a flood of rain.

Wool stood appalled at the prospect of turning out in such a storm upon
such a fruitless errand.

"Oh, you may stare and roll up your eyes, but I mean it, you varlet! So
be off with you! Go! I don't care if you should be drowned in the rain,
or blown off the horse, or struck by lightning. I hope you may be, you
knave, and I shall be rid of one villain! Off, you varlet, or----" Old
Hurricane lifted a bronze statuette to hurl at Wool's delinquent head,
but that functionary dodged and ran out in time to escape a blow that
might have put a period to his mortal career.

But let no one suppose that honest Wool took the road that night! He
simply ran down-stairs and hid himself comfortably in the lowest
regions of the house, there to tarry until the storms, social and
atmospheric, should be over.

Meanwhile the night deepened, the storm raged without and Old Hurricane
raged within!

The lightning flashed, blaze upon blaze, with blinding glare! The
thunder broke, crash upon crash, with deafening roar! The wind
gathering all its force cannonaded the old walls as though it would
batter down the house! The rain fell in floods! In the midst of all the
Demon's Run, swollen to a torrent, was heard like the voice of a
"roaring lion, seeking whom he might devour!"

Old Hurricane strode up and down the floor, groaning, swearing,
threatening, and at every fresh blast of the storm without, breaking
forth into fury!

Mrs. Condiment sat crouched in a corner, praying fervently every time
the lightning blazed into the room, longing to go and join the men and
maids in the next apartment, yet fearful to stir from her seat lest she
should attract Old Hurricane's attention, and draw down upon herself
the more terrible thunder and lightning of his wrath. But to escape Old
Hurricane's violence was not in the power of mortal man or woman. Soon
her very stillness exasperated him and he broke forth upon her with:

"Mrs. Condiment, mum, I don't know how you can bear to sit there so
quietly and listen to this storm, knowing that the poor child is
exposed to it?"

"Major Warfield, would it do any good for me to jump up and trot up and
down the floor and go on as you do, even supposing I had the strength?"
inquired the meek old lady, thoroughly provoked at his injustice!

"I'd like to see you show a little more feeling! You are a perfect
barbarian! Oh, Cap! my darling, where are you now? Heavens! what a
blast was that! Enough to shake the house about our ears! I wish it
would! blamed if I don't!"

"Oh, Major! Major! don't say such awful things, nor make such awful
wishes!" said the appalled old lady--"you don't know what you might
bring down upon us!"

"No, nor care! If the old house should tumble in, it would bury under
its ruins a precious lot of good-for-nothing people, unfit to live!
Heavens! what a flash of lightning! Oh, Cap, Cap, my darling, where are
you in this storm? Mrs. Condiment, mum! if any harm comes to Capitola
this night, I'll have you indicted for manslaughter!"

"Major Warfield, if it is all on Miss Black's account that you are
raving and raging so, I think it is quite vain of you! for any young
woman caught out in a storm would know enough to get into shelter;
especially would Miss Black, who is a young lady of great courage and
presence of mind, as we know. She has surely gone into some house, to
remain until the storm is over," said Mrs. Condiment, soothingly.

This speech, so well intended, exasperated Old Hurricane more than all
the rest; stopping and striking his cane upon the floor, he roared
forth:

"Hang it, mum! hold your foolish old tongue! You know nothing about it!
Capitola is exposed to more serious dangers than the elements! Perils
of all sorts surround her! She should never, rain or shine, go out
alone! Oh, the little villain! the little wretch! the little demon! if
ever I get her safe in this house again, won't I lock her up and keep
her on bread and water until she learns to behave herself!"

Here again a blinding flash of lightning, a deafening peal of thunder,
a terrific blast of wind and flood of rain suddenly arrested his
speech.

"Oh, my Cap! my dear Cap! I needn't threaten you! I shall never have
the chance to be cruel to you again--never! You'll perish in this
terrible storm and then--and then my tough old heart will break! It
will--it will, Cap! But demmy, before it does, I'll break the necks of
every man and woman, in this house, old and young! Hear it, heaven and
earth, for I'll do it!"

All things must have an end. So, as the hours passed on, the storm
having spent all its fury, gradually grumbled itself into silence.

Old Hurricane also raged himself into a state of exhaustion so complete
that when the midnight hour struck he could only drop into a chair and
murmur:

"Twelve o'clock and no news of her yet!"

And then unwillingly he went to bed, attended by Mrs. Condiment and
Pitapat instead of Wool, who was supposed to be out in search of
Capitola, but who was, in fact, fast asleep on the floor of a dry
cellar.

Meanwhile, where did this midnight hour find Capitola?




CHAPTER IV.

THE HIDDEN HOLLOW.

    On every side the aspect was the same,
      All ruined, desolate, forlorn and savage,
    No hand or foot within the precinct came
      To rectify or ravage!
    Here Echo never mocked the human tongue;
      Some weighty crime that Heaven could not pardon.
    A secret curse on that old Building hung
      And its deserted garden!

                          --_Hood's Haunted House._


Cap was a bit of a Don Quixote! The stirring incidents of the last few
months had spoiled her; the monotony of the last few weeks had bored
her; and now she had just rode out in quest of adventures.

The Old Hidden House, with its mysterious traditions, its gloomy
surroundings and its haunted reputation, had always possessed a
powerful attraction for one of Cap's adventurous spirit. To seek and
gaze upon the somber house, of which, and of whose inmates, such
terrible stories had been told or hinted, had always been a secret
desire and purpose of Capitola.

And now the presence there of a beautiful girl near her own age was the
one last item that tipped the balance, making the temptation to ride
thither outweigh every other consideration of duty, prudence and
safety. And having once started on the adventure, Cap felt the
attraction drawing her toward the frightful hollow of the Hidden House
growing stronger with every step taken thitherward.

She reached the banks of the "Demon's Run," and took the left-hand road
down the stream until she reached the left point of the Horse-Shoe
Mountain, and then going up around the point, she kept close under the
back of the range until she had got immediately in the rear of the
round bend of the "Horse Shoe," behind Hurricane Hall.

"Well," said Cap, as she drew rein here, and looked up at the lofty
ascent of gray rocks that concealed Hurricane Hall, "to have had to
come such a circuit around the outside of the 'Horse Shoe,' to find
myself just at the back of our old house, and no farther from home than
this! There's as many doubles and twists in these mountains as there
are in a lawyer's discourse! There, Gyp, you needn't turn back again
and pull at the bridle, to tell me that there is a storm coming up and
that you want to go home! I have no more respect for your opinion than
I have for Mrs. Condiment's. Besides, you carry a damsel-errant in
quest of adventures, Gyp, and so you must on, Gyp--you must on!" said
Capitola, forcibly pulling her horse's head around, and then taking a
survey of the downward path.

It was a scene fascinating from its very excess of gloom and terror!

It was a valley so deep and dark as to merit the name of the hollow, or
hole, but for its great extent and its thick growth of forest, through
which spectral-looking rocks gleamed, and moaning waters could be heard
but not seen.

"Now, somewhere in that thick forest in the bottom of that vale, stands
the house--well called the Hidden House, since not a chimney of it can
be seen even from this commanding height! But I suppose this path that
leads down into the valley may conduct me to the building! Come along,
Gyp! You needn't turn up your head and pull at the bit! You've got to
go! I am bound this night to see the outside of the Hidden House, and
the window of the haunted chamber at the very least!" said Cap,
throwing her eyes up defiantly toward the darkening sky, and putting
whip to her unwilling horse.

As the path wound down into the valley the woods were found deeper,
thicker and darker. It occupied all Cap's faculties to push her way
through the overhanging and interlacing branches of the trees.

"Good gracious," she said, as she used her left arm rather vigorously
to push aside the obstructions to her path, "one would think this were
the enchanted forest containing the castle of the sleeping beauty, and
I was the knight destined to deliver her! I'm sure it wouldn't have
been more difficult."

Still deeper fell the path, thicker grew the forest and darker the way.

"Gyp, I'm under the impression that we shall have to turn back yet!"
said Cap, dolefully stopping in the midst of a thicket so dense that it
completely blockaded her farther progress in the same direction. Just
as she came to this very disagreeable conclusion she spied an opening
on her left, from which a bridle-path struck out. With an exclamation
of joy she immediately turned her horse's head and struck into it. This
path was very rocky, but in some degree clearer than the other, and she
went on quickly, singing to herself, until gradually her voice began to
be lost in the sound of many rushing waters.

"It must be the Devil's Punch Bowl! I am approaching!" she said to
herself, as she went on.

She was right. The roaring of the waters grew deafening and the path
became so rugged with jagged and irregularly piled rocks, that Cap
could scarcely keep her horse upon his feet in climbing over them. And
suddenly, when she least looked for it, the great natural
curiosity--the Devil's Punch Bowl--burst upon her view!

It was an awful abyss, scooped out as it were from the very bowels of
the earth, with its steep sides rent open in dreadful chasms, and far
down in its fearful depths a boiling whirlpool of black waters.

Urging her reluctant steed through a thicket of stunted thorns and over
a chaos of shattered rocks, Capitola approached as near as she safely
could to the brink of this awful pit. So absorbed was she in gazing
upon this terrible phenomenon of natural scenery that she had not
noticed, in the thicket on her right, a low hut that, with its
brown-green moldering colors, fell so naturally in with the hue of the
surrounding scenery as easily to escape observation. She did not even
observe that the sky was entirely overcast, and the thunder was
muttering in the distance. She was aroused from her profound reverie by
a voice near her asking:

"Who are you, that dares to come without a guide to the Devil's Punch
Bowl?"

Capitola looked around and came nearer screaming than she ever had been
in her life, upon seeing the apparition that stood before her. Was it
man, woman, beast or demon? She could not tell! It was a very tall,
spare form, with a black cloth petticoat tied around the waist, a blue
coat buttoned over the breast, and a black felt hat tied down with a
red handkerchief, shading the darkest old face she had ever seen in her
life.

"Who are you, I say, who comes to the Devil's Punch Bowl without leave
or license?" repeated the frightful creature, shifting her cane from
one hand to the other.

"I? I am Capitola Black, from Hurricane Hall; but who, in the name of
all the fates and furies, are you?" inquired Capitola, who, in getting
over the shock, had recovered her courage.

"I am Harriet the Seeress of Hidden Hollow!" replied the apparition, in
a melodramatic manner that would not have discredited the queen of
tragedy herself. "You have heard of me?"

"Yes, but I always heard you called Old Hat, the Witch," said Cap.

"The world is profane--give me your hand!" said the beldame, reaching
out her own to take that of Capitola.

"Stop! Is your hand clean? It looks very black!"

"Cleaner than yours will be when it is stained with blood, young
maiden!"

"Tut! If you insist on telling my fortune, tell me a pleasant one, and
I will pay you double," laughed Capitola.

"The fates are not to be mocked. Your destiny will be that which the
stars decree. To prove to you that I know this, I tell you that you are
not what you have been!"

"You've hit it this time, old lady, for I was a baby once and now I am
a young girl!" said Cap, laughing.

"You will not continue to be that which you are now!" pursued the hag,
still attentively reading the lines of her subject's hand.

"Right again; for if I live long enough I shall be an old woman."

"You bear a name that you will not bear long!"

"I think that quite a safe prophecy, as I haven't the most distant idea
of being an old maid!"

"This little hand of yours--this dainty woman's hand--will be--red with
blood!"

"Now, do you know, I don't doubt that either? I believe it altogether
probable that I shall have to cook my husband's dinner and kill the
chickens for his soup!"

"Girl, beware! You deride the holy stars--and already they are adverse
to you!" said the hag, with a threatening glare.

"Ha, ha, ha! I love the beautiful stars but did not fear them! I fear
only Him who made the stars!"

"Poor butterfly, listen and beware! You are destined to imbrue that
little hand in the life current of one who loves you the most of all on
earth! You are destined to rise by the destruction of one who would
shed his heart's best blood for you!" said the beldame, in an awful
voice.

Capitola's eyes flashed! She advanced her horse a step or two nearer
the witch and raised her riding whip, saying:

"I protest! If you were only a man I should lay this lash over your
wicked shoulders until my arms ached! How dare you? Faith, I don't
wonder that in the honest old times such pests as you were cooled in
the ducking pond! Good gracious, that must have made a hissing and
spluttering in the water, though!"

"Blasphemer, pay me and begone!"

"Pay you? I tell you I would if you were only a man; but it would be
sinful to pay a wretched old witch in the only way you deserve to be
paid!" said Cap, flourishing her riding whip before a creature tall
enough and strong enough to have doubled up her slight form together
and hurled it into the abyss.

"Gold! gold!" said the hag curtly, holding out black and talon-like
fingers, which she worked convulsively.

"Gold! gold, indeed! for such a wicked fortune! Not a penny!" said Cap.

"Ho! you're stingy; you do not like to part with the yellow demon that
has bought the souls of all your house!"

"Don't I? You shall see! There! If you want gold, go fish it from the
depth of the whirlpool," said Cap, taking her purse and casting it over
the precipice.

This exasperated the crone to frenzy.

"Away! Begone!" she cried, shaking her long arm at the girl. "Away!
Begone! The fate pursues you! The badge of blood is stamped upon your
palm!"

"'Fee--faw--fum'" said Cap.

"Scorner! Beware! The curse of the crimson hand is upon you!"

--"'I smell the blood of an Englishman'"--continued Cap.

"Derider of the fates, you are foredoomed to crime!"

--"'Be he alive or be he dead, I'll have his brains to butter my
bread!'" concluded Cap.

"Be silent!" shrieked the beldame.

"I won't!" said Cap. "Because you see, if we are in for the horrible, I
can beat you hollow at that!

    "'Avaunt! and quit my sight!
    Let the earth hide thee!
    Thy bones are marrowless! Thy blood is cold!
    Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
    Which thou dost glare with?'"

"Begone! You're doomed! doomed! doomed!" shrieked the witch, retreating
into her hut.

Cap laughed and stroked the neck of her horse, saying:

"Gyp, my son, that was old Nick's wife, who was with us just this
instant, and now, indeed, Gyp, if we are to see the Hidden House this
afternoon, we must get on!"

And so saying she followed the path that wound half-way around the
Punch Bowl and then along the side of a little mountain torrent called
the Spout, which, rising in an opposite mountain, leaped from rock to
rock, with many a sinuous turn, as it wound through the thicket that
immediately surrounded the Hidden House until it finally jetted through
a subterranean channel into the Devil's Punch Bowl.

Capitola was now, unconsciously, upon the very spot, where, seventeen
years before, the old nurse had been forcibly stopped and compelled to
attend the unknown lady.

As Capitola pursued the path that wound lower and lower into the dark
valley the gloom of the thicket deepened. Her thoughts ran on all the
horrible traditions connected with the Hidden House and Hollow--the
murder and robbery of the poor peddler--the mysterious assassination of
Eugene Le Noir; the sudden disappearance of his youthful widow; the
strange sights and sounds reported to be heard and seen about the
mansion; the spectral light at the upper gable window; the white form
seen flitting through the chamber; the pale lady that in the dead of
night drew the curtains of a guest that once had slept there; and above
all Capitola thought of the beautiful, strange girl, who was now an
inmate of that sinful and accursed house! And while these thoughts
absorbed her mind, suddenly, in a turning of the path, she came full
upon the gloomy building.




CHAPTER V.

THE HIDDEN HOUSE.

    The very stains and fractures on the wall
    Assuming features solemn and terrific,
    Hinted some tragedy of that old hall
    Locked up in hieroglyphic!
    Prophetic hints that filled the soul with dread;
    But to one gloomy window pointing mostly,
    The while some secret inspiration said,
    That chamber is the ghostly!

                          --Hood.


The Hidden House was a large, irregular edifice of dark red sandstone
with its walls covered closely with the clinging ivy, that had been
clipped away only from a few of the doors and windows, and its roof
over-shadowed by the top branches of gigantic oaks and elms that
clustered around and nearly concealed the building.

It might have been a long-forsaken house, for any sign of human
habitation that was to be seen about it. All was silent, solitary and
gloomy.

As Capitola drew up her horse to gaze upon its somber walls she
wondered which was the window at which the spectral light and ghostly
face had been seen. She soon believed that she had found it.

At the highest point of the building, immediately under the sharp angle
of the roof, in the gable and nearest to view, was a solitary window.
The ivy that clung tightly to the stone, covering every portion of the
wall at this end, was clipped away from that high placed, dark and
lonely window by which Capitola's eyes were strangely fascinated.

While thus she gazed in wonder, interest and curiosity, though without
the least degree of superstitious dread, a vision flashed upon her
sight that sent the blood from her ruddy cheek to her brave heart, and
shook the foundations of her unbelief!

For while she gazed, suddenly that dark window was illumed by a
strange, unearthly light that streamed forth into the gloomy evening
air, and touched with blue flame the quivering leaves of every tree in
its brilliant line! In the midst of this lighted window appeared a
white female face wild with woe! And then the face suddenly vanished
and the light was swallowed up in darkness!

Capitola remained transfixed!

"Great heaven!" she thought, "can these things really be! Have the
ghostly traditions of this world truth in them at last? When I heard
this story of the haunted window I thought some one had surely imagined
or invented it! Now I have seen for myself; but if I were to tell what
I have seen not one in a hundred would believe me!"

While these startling thoughts disturbed her usual well-balanced mind,
a vivid flash of lightning, accompanied by a tremendous peal of thunder
and a heavy fall of rain, roused her into renewed activity.

"Gyp, my boy, the storm is upon us sure enough! We shall catch it all
around, get well drowned, beaten and buffeted here and well abused when
we get home! Meantime, Gyp, which is the worst, the full fury of the
tempest or the mysterious terrors of the Haunted House!"

Another blinding flash of lightning, a stunning crash of thunder, a
flood of rain and tornado of wind decided her.

"We'll take the Haunted House, Gyp, my friend! That spectral lady of
the lighted window looked rather in sorrow than in anger, and who knows
but the ghosts may be hospitable? So gee up, Dobbin!" said Capitola,
and, urging her horse with one hand and holding on her cap with the
other, she went on against wind and rain until she reached the front of
the old house.

Not a creature was to be seen; every door and window was closely shut.
Dismounting, Capitola led her horse under the shelter of a thickly
leaved oak tree, secured him, and then holding up her saturated skirt
with one hand and holding on her cap with the other, she went up some
moldering stone steps to an old stone portico and, seizing the heavy
iron knocker of a great black oak double door, she knocked loudly
enough to awaken all the mountain echoes.

She waited a few minutes for an answer, but receiving none, she knocked
again, more loudly than before. Still there was no reply. And growing
impatient, she seized the knocker with both hands and exerting all her
strength, made the welkin ring again!

This brought a response. The door was unlocked and angrily jerked open
by a short, squarely formed, beetle-browed, stern-looking woman,
clothed in a black stuff gown and having a stiff muslin cap upon her
head.

"Who are you? What do you want here?" harshly demanded this woman, whom
Capitola instinctively recognized as Dorkey Knight, the morose
housekeeper of the Hidden House.

"Who am I? What do I want? Old Nick fly away with you! It's plain
enough to be seen who I am and what I want. I am a young woman caught
out in the storm and I want shelter!" said Cap, indignantly. And her
words were endorsed by a terrific burst of the tempest in lightning,
thunder, wind and rain!

"Come in then and when you ask favors learn to keep a civil tongue in
your head!" said the woman sternly, taking the guest by the hand and
pulling her in and shutting and locking the door.

"Favors! Plague on you for a bearess! I asked no favor! Every
storm-beaten traveler has a right to shelter under the first roof that
offers, and none but a curmudgeon would think of calling it a favor!
And as for keeping a civil tongue in my head, I'll do it when you set
me the example!" said Cap.

"Who are you?" again demanded the woman.

"Oh, I see you are no Arabian in your notions of hospitality! Those
pagans entertain a guest without asking him a single question; and
though he were their bitterest foe, they consider him while he rests
beneath their tent sacred from intrusion."

"That's because they were pagans!" said Dorkey. "But as I am a
Christian, I'd thank you to let me know who it is that I have received
under this roof."

"My name," said our heroine, impatiently, "is Capitola Black! I live
with my uncle, Major Warfield, at Hurricane Hall! And now, I should
thank your ladyship to send some one to put away my horse, while you
yourself accommodate me with dry clothes."

While our saucy little heroine spoke the whole aspect of the
dark-browed woman changed.

"Capitola--Capitola," she muttered, gazing earnestly upon the face of
the unwelcome guest.

"Yes, Capitola! That is my name! You never heard anything against it,
did you?"

For all answer the woman seized her hand, and while the lightning
flashed and the thunder rolled, and the wind and rain beat down, she
drew her the whole length of the hall before a back window that
overlooked the neglected garden, and, regardless of the electric fluid
that incessantly blazed upon them, she held her there and scrutinized
her features.

"Well, I like this! Upon my word, I do!" said Cap, composedly.

Without replying, the strange woman seized her right hand, forcibly
opened it, gazed upon the palm and then, flinging it back with a
shudder, exclaimed:

"Capitola, what brought you under this roof? Away! Begone! Mount your
horse and fly while there is yet time!"

"What! expose myself again to the storm? I won't, and that's flat!"
said Cap.

"Girl! girl! there are worse dangers in the world than any to be feared
from thunder, lightning, rain or wind!"

"Very well, then, when I meet them it will be time enough to deal with
them! Meanwhile the stormy night and my soaked clothing are very
palpable evils, and as I see no good end to be gained by my longer
enduring them, I will just beg you to stop soothsaying--(as I have had
enough of that from another old witch)--and be as good as to permit me
to change my clothes!"

"It is madness! You shall not stay here!" cried the woman, in a harsh
voice.

"And I tell you I will! You are not the head of the family, and I do
not intend to be turned out by you!"

While she spoke a servant crossed the hall and the woman, whisking
Capitola around until her back was turned and her face concealed, went
to speak to the newcomer.

"When will your master be here?" Capitola heard her inquire.

"Not to-night; he saw the storm rising and did not wish to expose
himself. He sent me on to say that he would not be here until morning.
I was caught, as you see! I am dripping wet," replied the man.

"Go, change your clothes at once then, Davy."

"Who is that stranger?" asked the man, pointing to Capitola.

"Some young woman of the neighborhood, who has been caught out in the
tempest. But you had better go and change your clothes than to stand
here gossiping," said the woman, harshly.

"I say," said the man, "the young woman is a God-send to Miss Clara;
nobody has been to see her yet; nobody ever visits this house unless
they are driven to it. I don't wonder the colonel and our young master
pass as much as ten months in the year away from home, spending all the
summer at the watering places, and all the winter in New York or
Washington!"

"Hold your tongue! What right have you to complain? You always attend
them in their travels!"

"True, but you see for this last season they have both been staying
here, old master to watch the heiress, young master to court her, and
as I have no interest in that game, I find the time hangs heavy on my
hands," complained the man.

"It will hang heavier if you take a long fit of illness by standing in
wet clothes," muttered the woman.

"Why, so 'twill, missus! So here goes," assented the man, hurrying
across the hall and passing out through the door opposite that by which
he entered.

Dorcas returned to her guest.

Eying her closely for a while, she at length inquired:

"Capitola, how long have you lived at Hurricane Hall?"

"So long," replied Cap, "that you must have heard of me! I, at least,
have often heard of Mother Dorkey Knight."

"And heard no good of her!"

"Well, no--to be candid with you, I never did," said Cap.

"And much harm of her?" continued the woman, keeping her stern black
eyes fixed upon those of her guest.

"Well, yes--since you ask me, I have heard pretty considerable harm!"
answered Cap, nothing daunted.

"Where did you live before you came to Hurricane Hall?" asked Dorcas.

"Where I learned to fear God, to speak the truth and to shame the
devil!" replied Cap.

--"And to force yourself into people's houses against their will!"

"There you are again! I tell you that when I learn from the head of
this household that I am unwelcome, then I will retreat, and not until
then! And now I demand to be presented to the master."

"To Colonel Le Noir?"

"Yes."

"I cannot curse you with 'the curse of a granted prayer!' Colonel Le
Noir is away."

"Why do you talk so strangely?" inquired Capitola.

"It is my whim. Perhaps my head is light."

"I should think it was, excessively so! Well--as the master of the
house is away, be good enough to present me to the mistress?"

"What mistress? There is no mistress here!" replied Dorcas, looking
around in strange trepidation.

"I mean the young lady, Colonel Le Noir's ward. In lieu of any other
lady, she, I suppose, may be considered the mistress of the house!"

"Humph! Well, young girl, as you are fully resolved to stand your
ground. I suppose there is nothing to do but to put up with you!" said
Dorcas.

"And put up my horse," added Cap.

"He shall be taken care of! But mind, you must depart early in the
morning!" said Dorcas, sternly.

"Once more, and for the last, Mother Cerberus, I assure you I do not
acknowledge your authority to dismiss me!" retorted Capitola. "So show
me to the presence of your mistress!"

"Perverse, like all the rest! Follow me!" said the housekeeper, leading
the way from the hall toward a back parlor.




CHAPTER VI.

THE INMATE OF THE HIDDEN HOUSE.

    There is a light around her brow,
      A holiness in those dark eyes,
    That show, though wandering earthward now,
      Her spirit's home is in the skies.

                          --Moore.


Pushing open the door, Dorcas Knight exclaimed:

"Here is a young lady, Miss Black, from Hurricane Hall, come to see
you, Miss Day."

And having made this announcement, the woman retired and shut the door
behind her.

And Capitola found herself in a large, dark, gloomy, wainscoted room,
whose tall, narrow windows afforded but little light, and whose immense
fireplace and blackened furniture seemed to belong to a past century.

The only occupant of this somber apartment was a young girl, seated in
pensive thought beside the central table. She was clothed in deep
mourning, which only served to throw into fairer relief the beauty of
her pearly skin, golden hair and violet eyes.

The vision of her mourning robes and melancholy beauty so deeply
impressed Capitola that, almost for the first time in her life, she
hesitated from a feeling of diffidence, and said gently:

"Indeed, I fear that this is an unwarranted intrusion on my part, Miss
Day."

"You are very welcome," replied the sweetest voice Capitola had ever
heard, as the young girl arose and advanced to meet her. "But you have
been exposed to the storm. Please come into my room and change your
clothes," continued the young hostess, as she took Cap's hand and led
her into an adjoining room.

The storm was still raging, but these apartments being in the central
portion of the strong old house, were but little exposed to the sight
or sound of its fury.

There was a lamp burning upon the mantelpiece, by the light of which
the young girl furnished her visitor with dry clothing and assisted her
to change, saying as she did so:

"I think we are about the same size, and that my clothes will fit you;
but I will not offer you mourning habiliments--you shall have this
lilac silk."

"I am very sorry to see you in mourning," said Capitola, earnestly.

"It is for my father," replied Clara, very softly.

As they spoke the eyes of the two young girls met. They were both good
physiognomists and intuitive judges of character. Consequently in the
full meeting of their eyes they read, understood and appreciated each
other.

The pure, grave, and gentle expression of Clara's countenance touched
the heart of Capitola.

The bright, frank, honest face of Cap recommended her to Clara.

The very opposite traits of their equally truthful characters attracted
them to each other.

Clara conducted her guest back into the wainscoted parlor, where a
cheerful fire had been kindled to correct the dampness of the air. And
here they sat down unmindful of the storm that came much subdued
through the thickness of the walls. And, as young creatures, however
tried and sorrowful, will do, they entered into a friendly chat. And
before an hour had passed Capitola thought herself well repaid for her
sufferings from the storm and the rebuff, in having formed the
acquaintance of Clara Day.

She resolved, let Old Hurricane rage as he might, henceforth she would
be a frequent visitor to the Hidden House.

And Clara, for her part, felt that in Capitola she had found a frank,
spirited, faithful neighbor who might become an estimable friend.

While they were thus growing into each other's favor, the door opened
and admitted a gentleman of tall and thin figure and white and
emaciated face, shaded by a luxuriant growth of glossy black hair and
beard. He could not have been more than twenty-six, but, prematurely
broken by vice, he seemed forty years of age. He advanced bowing toward
the young women.

As Capitola's eyes fell upon this newcomer it required all her presence
of mind and powers of self-control to prevent her from staring or
otherwise betraying herself--for in this stranger she recognized the
very man who had stopped her upon her night ride. She did, however,
succeed in banishing from her face every expression of consciousness.
And when Miss Day courteously presented him to her guest, saying
merely, "My cousin, Mr. Craven Le Noir, Miss Black," Capitola arose and
curtsied as composedly as if she had never set eyes upon his face
before.

He on his part evidently remembered her, and sent one stealthy, keen
and scrutinizing glance into her face; but, finding that imperturbable,
he bowed with stately politeness and seemed satisfied that she had not
identified him as her assailant.

Craven Le Noir drew his chair to the fire, seated himself and entered
into an easy conversation with Clara and her guest. Whenever he
addressed Clara there was a deference and tenderness in his tone and
glance that seemed very displeasing to the fair girl, who received all
these delicate attentions with coldness and reserve. These things did
not escape the notice of Capitola, who mentally concluded that Craven
Le Noir was a lover of Clara Day, but a most unacceptable lover.

When supper was announced it was evidently hailed by Clara as a great
relief. And after the meal was over she arose and excused herself to
her cousin by saying that her guest, Miss Black, had been exposed to
the storm and was doubtless very much fatigued and that she would show
her to her chamber.

Then, taking a night lamp, she invited Capitola to come and conducted
her to an old-fashioned upper chamber, where a cheerful fire was
burning on the hearth. Here the young girls sat down before the fire
and improved their acquaintance by an hour's conversation. After which
Clara arose, and saying, "I sleep immediately below your room, Miss
Black; if you should want anything rap on the floor and I shall hear
you and get up," she wished her guest a good night's rest and retired
from the room.

Cap was disinclined to sleep; a strange superstitious feeling which she
could neither understand nor throw off had fallen upon her spirits.

She took the night lamp in her hand and got up to examine her chamber.
It was a large, dark, oak-paneled room, with a dark carpet on the floor
and dark-green curtains on the windows and the bedstead. Over the
mantelpiece hung the portrait of a most beautiful black-haired and
black-eyed girl of about fourteen years of age, but upon whose
infantile brow fell the shadow of some fearful woe. There was something
awful in the despair "on that face so young" that bound the gazer in an
irresistible and most painful spell. And Capitola remained standing
before it transfixed, until the striking of the hall clock aroused her
from her enchantment. Wondering who the young creature could have been,
what had been her history and, above all, what had been the nature of
that fearful woe that darkened like a curse her angel brow, Capitola
turned almost sorrowfully away and began to prepare for bed.

She undressed, put on the delicate nightclothes Clara had provided for
her use, said her evening prayers, looked under the bed--a precaution
taken ever since the night upon which she had discovered the
burglars--and, finding all right, she blew out her candle and lay down.
She could not sleep--many persons of nervous or mercurial temperaments
cannot do so the first night in a strange bed. Cap was very mercurial,
and the bed and room in which she lay were very strange; for the first
time since she had had a home to call her own she was unexpectedly
staying all night away from her friends, and without their having any
knowledge of her whereabouts. She was conjecturing, half in fear and
half in fun, how Old Hurricane was taking her escapade and what he
would say to her in the morning. She was wondering to find herself in
such an unforeseen position as that of a night guest in the mysterious
Hidden House--wondering whether this was the guest chamber in which the
ghost appeared to the officer and these were the very curtains that the
pale lady drew at night. While her thoughts were thus running over the
whole range of circumstances around her singular position, sleep
overtook Capitola and speculation was lost in brighter visions.

How long she had slept and dreamed she did not know, when something
gently awakened her. She opened her eyes calmly--to meet a vision that
brave as she was, nearly froze the blood in her warm veins.

Her chamber was illumined with an intense blue flame that lighted up
every portion of the apartment with a radiance bright as day, and in
the midst of this effulgence moved a figure clothed in white--a
beautiful, pale, spectral woman, whose large, motionless black eyes,
deeply set in her death-like face, and whose long unbound black hair,
fallen upon her white raiment, were the only marks of color about her
marble form.

Paralyzed with wonder, Capitola watched this figure as it glided about
the chamber. The apparition approached the dressing-table, seemed to
take something thence, and then gliding toward the bed, to Capitola's
inexpressible horror, drew back the curtains and bent down and gazed
upon her! Capitola had no power to scream, to move or to avert her gaze
from those awful eyes that met her own, until at length, as the
spectral head bent lower, she felt the pressure of a pair of icy lips
upon her brow and closed her eyes!

When she opened them again the vision had departed and the room was
dark and quiet.

There was no more sleep for Capitola. She heard the clock strike four,
and was pleased to find that it was so near day. Still the time seemed
very long to her, who lay there wondering, conjecturing and speculating
on the strange adventure of the night.

When the sun arose she left her restless bed, bathed her excited head
and proceeded to dress herself. When she had finished her toilet, with
the exception of putting on her trinkets, she suddenly missed a ring
that she prized more than she did all her possessions put together--it
was a plain gold band, bearing the inscription Capitola-Eugene, and
which she had been enjoined by her old nurse never to part from but
with life. She had, in her days of destitution suffered the extremes of
cold and hunger; had been upon the very brink of death from starvation
or freezing, but without ever dreaming of sacrificing her ring. And now
for the first time it was missing. While she was still looking
anxiously for the lost jewel the door opened and Dorcas Knight entered
the room, bearing on her arm Capitola's riding dress, which had been
well dried and ironed.

"Miss Capitola, here is your habit; you had better put it on at once,
as I have ordered breakfast an hour sooner than usual, so that you may
have an early start."

"Upon my word, you are very anxious to get rid of me, but not more so
than I am to depart," said Capitola, still pursuing her search.

"Your friends, who do not know where you are, must be very uneasy about
you. But what are you looking for?"

"A ring, a plain gold circle, with my name and that of another
inscribed on it, and which I would not lose for the world. I hung it on
a pin in this pin-cushion last night before I went to bed. I would
swear I did, and now it is missing," answered Cap, still pursuing her
search.

"If you lost it in this room it will certainly be found," said Dorcas
Knight putting down the habit and helping in the search.

"I am not so sure of that. There was some one in my room last night."

"Some one in your room!" exclaimed Dorcas in dismay.

"Yes; a dark-haired woman, all dressed in white!"

Dorcas Knight gave two or three angry grunts and then harshly
exclaimed:

"Nonsense! woman, indeed! there is no such woman about the house! There
are no females here except Miss Day, myself and you--not even a
waiting-maid or cook."

"Well," said Cap, "if it was not a woman it was a ghost; for I was wide
awake, and I saw it with my own eyes!"

"Fudge! you've heard that foolish story of the haunted room, and you
have dreamed the whole thing!"

"I tell you I didn't! I saw it! Don't I know?"

"I say you dreamed it! There is no such living woman here; and as for a
ghost, that is all folly. And I must beg, Miss Black, that you will not
distress Miss Day by telling her this strange dream of yours. She has
never heard the ridiculous story of the haunted room, and, as she lives
here in solitude, I would not like her to hear of it."

"Oh, I will say nothing to disquiet Miss Day; but it was no dream. It
was real, if there is any reality in this world."

There was no more said. They continued to look for the ring, but in
vain. Dorcas Knight, however, assured her guest that it should be found
and returned, and that--breakfast waited. Whereupon Capitola went down
to the parlor, where she found Clara awaiting her presence to give her
a kindly greeting.

"Mr. Le Noir never gets up until very late, and so we do not wait for
him," said Dorcas Knight, as she took her seat at the head of the table
and signed to the young girls to gather around it.

After breakfast Capitola, promising to come again soon, and inviting
Clara to return her visit, took leave of her entertainers and set out
for home.

"Thank heaven! I have got her off in time and safety!" muttered Dorcas
Knight, in triumph.




CHAPTER VII.

CAP'S RETURN.

    Must I give way and room for your rash choler?
    Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
    Go show your slaves how choleric you are!
    And make your bondsmen tremble! I'll not blench!

                          --Shakespeare.


It happened that about sunrise that morning Wool awoke in the cellar,
and remembered that on the night previous his master had commanded him
to sally forth in the storm and seek his young mistress, and had
forbidden him, on pain of broken bones, to return without bringing her
safe. Therefore, what did the honest soul do but steal out to the
stables, saddle and mount a horse and ride back to the house just as
Mrs. Condiment had come out into the poultry yard to get eggs for
breakfast.

"Missus Compliment, ma'am, I'se been out all night in search of Miss
Caterpillar, without finding of her. Is she come back, ma'am?"

"Lor', no, indeed, Wool! I'm very anxious, and the major is taking on
dreadful! But I hope she is safe in some house. But, poor Wool, you
must have had a dreadful time out all night in the storm looking for
her!"

"Awful! Missus Compliment, ma'am, awful!" said Wool.

"Indeed, I know you had, poor creature, come in and get some warm
breakfast," said the kind old lady.

"I daren't, Missus Compliment. Old marse forbid me to show my face to
him until I fetch Miss Caterpillar home safe," said Wool, turning his
horse's head as if to go. In doing so he saw Capitola galloping toward
the house, and with an exclamation of joy pointed her out to the old
lady and rode on to meet her.

"Oh, Miss Caterpillar, I'se so glad I've found you! I'se done been out
looking for you all night long!" exclaimed Wool, as he met her.

Capitola pulled up her horse and surveyed the speaker with a comical
expression, saying:

"Been out all night looking for me! Well, I must say you seem in a fine
state of preservation for a man who has been exposed to the storm all
night. You have not a wet thread on you."

"Lor', miss, it rained till one o'clock, and then the wind riz and
blowed till six and blowed me dry," said Wool, as he sprang off his
horse and helped his young mistress to alight.

Then, instead of taking the beasts to the stable, he tied them to the
tree and hurried into the house and upstairs to his master's room, to
apprise him of the return of the lost sheep, Capitola.

Old Hurricane was lying awake, tossing, groaning and grumbling with
anxiety.

On seeing Wool enter he deliberately raised up and seized a heavy iron
candlestick and held it ready to hurl at the head of that worthy, whom
he thus addressed:

"Ah, you have come, you atrocious villain! You know the conditions. If
you have dared to show your face without bringing your young
mistress----"

"Please, marse, I wur out looking for her all night."

"Have you brought her?" thundered Old Hurricane, rising up.

"Please, marse, yes, sir; I done found her and brought her home safe."

"Send her up to me," said Old Hurricane, sinking back with a sigh of
infinite relief.

Wool flew to do his bidding.

In five minutes Capitola entered her uncle's chamber.

Now, Old Hurricane had spent a night of almost intolerable anxiety upon
his favorite's account, bewailing her danger and praying for her
safety; but no sooner did he see her enter his chamber safe and sound
and smiling than indignation quite mastered him, and jumping out of his
bed in his nightgown, he made a dash straight at Capitola.

Now, had Capitola run there is little doubt but that, in the blindness
of his fury, he would have caught and beat her then and there. But Cap
saw him coming, drew up her tiny form, folded her arms and looked him
directly in the face.

This stopped him; but, like a mettlesome old horse suddenly pulled up
in full career, he stamped and reared and plunged with fury, and foamed
and spluttered and stuttered before he could get words out.

"What do you mean, you vixen, by standing there and popping your great
eyes out at me? Are you going to bite, you tigress? What do you mean by
facing me at all?" he roared, shaking his fist within an inch of
Capitola's little pug nose.

"I am here because you sent for me, sir," was Cap's unanswerable
rejoinder.

"Here because I sent for you! humph! humph! humph! and come dancing and
smiling into my room as if you had not kept me awake all the live-long
night--yes, driven me within an inch of brain fever! Not that I cared
for you, you limb of Old Nick! not that I cared for you, except to wish
with all my heart and soul that something or other had happened to you,
you vagrant! Where did you spend the night, you lunatic?"

"At the old Hidden House, where I went to make a call on my new
neighbor, Miss Day, and where I was caught in the storm."

"I wish to heaven you had been caught in a man-trap and had all your
limbs broken, you--you--you--Oh!" ejaculated Old Hurricane, turning
short and trotting up and down the room. Presently he stopped before
Capitola and rapping his cane upon the floor, demanded:

"Who did you see at that accursed place, you--you--infatuated maniac?"

"Miss Day, Mr. Le Noir, Mrs. Knight and a man servant, name unknown,"
coolly replied Cap.

"And the head demon, where was he?"

"Uncle, if by the 'head demon' you mean Old Nick, I think it quite
likely, from present appearances, that he passed the night at Hurricane
Hall."

"I mean--Colonel Le Noir!" exclaimed Old Hurricane, as if the name
choked him.

"Oh! I understood that he had that day left home."

"Umph! Oh! Ah! That accounts for it; that accounts for it," muttered
Old Hurricane to himself; then, seeing that Cap was wistfully regarding
his face and attending to his muttered phrases, he broke out upon her
with:

"Get out of this--this--this----" He meant to say "get out of this
house," but a sure instinct warned him that if he should speak thus
Capitola, unlike the other members of his household, would take him at
his word.

"Get out of this room, you vagabond!" he vociferated.

And Cap, with a curtsey and a kiss of her hand, danced away.

Old Hurricane stamped up and down the floor, gesticulating like a
demoniac and vociferating:

"She'll get herself burked, kidnapped, murdered or what not! I'm sure
she will! I know it! I feel it! It's no use to order her not to go; she
will be sure to disobey, and go ten times as often for the very reason
that she was forbidden. What the demon shall I do? Wool! Wool! you
brimstone villain, come here!" he roared, going to the bell-rope and
pulling it until he broke it down.

Wool ran in with his hair bristling, his teeth chattering and his eyes
starting.

"Come here to me, you varlet! Now, listen: You are to keep a sharp
look-out after your young mistress. Whenever she rides abroad you are
to mount a horse and ride after her, and keep your eyes open, for if
you once lose sight of her, you knave, do you know what I shall do to
you, eh?"

"N--no, marse," stammered Wool, pale with apprehension.

"I should cut your eyelids off to improve your vision! Look to it, sir,
for I shall keep my word! And now come and help me to dress," concluded
Old Hurricane.

Wool, with chattering teeth, shaking knees and trembling fingers,
assisted his master in his morning toilet, meditating the while whether
it were not better to avoid impending dangers by running away.

And, in fact, between his master and his mistress, Wool had a hot time
of it. The weather, after the storm had cleared the atmosphere, was
delightful, and Cap rode out that very day. Poor Wool kept his eyeballs
metaphorically "skinned," for fear they should be treated literally
so--held his eyes wide open, lest Old Hurricane should keep his word
and make it impossible for him ever to shut them.

When Cap stole out, mounted her horse and rode away, in five minutes
from the moment of starting she heard a horse's hoofs behind her, and
presently saw Wool gallop to her side.

At first Cap bore this good-humoredly enough, only saying:

"Go home, Wool, I don't want you; I had much rather ride alone."

To which the groom replied:

"It is old marse's orders, miss, as I should wait on you."

Capitola's spirit rebelled against this; and, suddenly turning upon her
attendant, she indignantly exclaimed:

"Wool, I don't want you, sir; I insist upon being left alone, and I
order you to go home, sir!"

Upon this Wool burst into tears and roared.

Much surprised, Capitola inquired of him what the matter was.

For some time Wool could only reply by sobbing, but when he was able to
articulate he blubbered forth:

"It's nuf to make anybody go put his head under a meat-ax, so it is!"

"What is the matter, Wool?" again inquired Capitola.

"How'd you like to have your eyelids cut off?" howled Wool,
indignantly.

"What?" inquired Capitola.

"Yes; I axes how'd you like to have your eyelids cut off? Case that's
what ole marse t'reatens to do long o' me, if I don't follow arter you
and keep you in sight. And now you forbids of me to do it, and--and--and
I'll go and put my neck right underneaf a meat-ax!"

Now, Capitola was really kind-hearted, and, well knowing the despotic
temper of her guardian, she pitied Wool, and after a little hesitation
she said:

"Wool, so your old master says if you don't keep your eyes on me he'll
cut your eyelids off?"

"Ye--ye--yes, miss," sobbed Wool.

"Did he say if you didn't listen to me he'd cut your ears off?"

"N--n--no, miss."

"Did he swear if you didn't talk to me he'd cut your tongue out?"

"N--n--no, miss."

"Well, now, stop howling and listen to me! Since, at the peril of your
eyelids, you are obliged to keep me in sight, I give you leave to ride
just within view of me, but no nearer, and you are never to let me see
or hear you, if you can help it for I like to be alone."

"I'll do anything in this world for peace, Miss Caterpillar," said poor
Wool.

And upon this basis the affair was finally settled. And no doubt
Capitola owed much of her personal safety to the fact that Wool kept
his eyes open.

While these scenes were going on at Hurricane Hall, momentous events
were taking place elsewhere, which require another chapter for their
development.




CHAPTER VIII.

ANOTHER MYSTERY AT THE HIDDEN HOUSE.

    "Hark! what a shriek was that of fear intense,
    Of horror and amazement!
    What fearful struggle to the door and thence
    With mazy doubles to the grated casement!"


An hour after the departure of Capitola, Colonel Le Noir returned to
the Hidden House and learned from his man David that upon the preceding
evening a young girl of whose name he was ignorant had sought shelter
from the storm and passed the night at the mansion.

Now, Colonel Le Noir was extremely jealous of receiving strangers under
his roof, never, during his short stay at the Hidden House, going out
into company, lest he should be obliged in return to entertain
visitors. And when he learned that a strange girl had spent the night
beneath his roof, he frowningly directed that Dorcas should be sent to
him.

When his morose manager made her appearance he harshly demanded the
name of the young woman she had dared to receive beneath his roof.

Now, whether there is any truth in the theory of magnetism or not, it
is certain that Dorcas Knight--stern, harsh, resolute woman that she
was toward all others--became as submissive as a child in the presence
of Colonel Le Noir.

At his command she gave him all the information he required, not even
withholding the fact of Capitola's strange story of having seen the
apparition of the pale-faced lady in her chamber, together with the
subsequent discovery of the loss of her ring.

Colonel Le Noir sternly reprimanded his domestic manager for her
neglect of his orders and dismissed her from his presence.

The remainder of the day was passed by him in moody thought. That
evening he summoned his son to a private conference in the parlor--an
event that happily delivered poor Clara Day from their presence at her
fireside.

That night Clara, dreading lest at the end of their interview they
might return to her society, retired early to her chamber where she sat
reading until a late hour, when she went to bed and found transient
forgetfulness of trouble in sleep.

She did not know how long she had slept when she was suddenly and
terribly awakened by a woman's shriek sounding from the room
immediately overhead, in which, upon the night previous, Capitola had
slept.

Starting up in bed, Clara listened.

The shriek was repeated--prolonged and piercing--and was accompanied by
a muffled sound of struggling that shook the ceiling overhead.

Instinctively springing from her bed, Clara threw on her dressing-gown
and flew to the door; but just as she turned the latch to open it she
heard a bolt slipped on the outside and found herself a prisoner in her
own chamber.

Appalled, she stood and listened.

Presently there came a sound of footsteps on the stairs and a heavy
muffled noise as of some dead weight being dragged down the staircase
and along the passage. Then she heard the hall door cautiously opened
and shut. And, finally, she distinguished the sound of wheels rolling
away from the house.

Unable longer to restrain herself, she rapped and beat upon her own
door, crying aloud for deliverance.

Presently the bolt was withdrawn, the door jerked open and Dorcas
Knight, with a face of horror, stood before her.

"What is the matter! Who was that screaming? In the name of mercy, what
has happened?" cried Clara, shrinking in abhorrence from the ghastly
woman.

"Hush! it is nothing! There were two tomcats screaming and fighting in
the attic, and they fought all the way downstairs, rolling over and
over each other. I've just turned them out," faltered the woman,
shivering as with an ague fit.

"What--what was that--that went away in the carriage?" asked Clara
shuddering.

"The colonel, gone to meet the early stage at Tip-Top, to take him to
Washington. He would have taken leave of you last night, but when he
came to your parlor you had left it."

"But--but--there is blood upon your hand, Dorcas Knight!" cried Clara,
shaking with horror.

"I--I know; the cats scratched me as I put them out," stammered the
stern woman, trembling almost as much as Clara herself.

These answers failed to satisfy the young girl, who shrank in terror
and loathing from that woman's presence, and sought the privacy of her
own chamber, murmuring:

"What has happened? What has been done? Oh, heaven! oh, heaven! have
mercy on us! some dreadful deed has been done in this house to-night!"

There was no more sleep for Clara. She heard the clock strike every
hour from one to six in the morning, when she arose and dressed herself
and went from her room, expecting to see upon the floor and walls and
upon the faces of the household signs of some dreadful tragedy enacted
upon the previous night.

But all things were as usual--the same dark, gloomy and neglected
magnificence about the rooms and passages, the same reserved, sullen
and silent aspect about the persons.

Dorcas Knight presided as usual at the head of the breakfast table, and
Craven Le Noir at the foot. Clara sat in her accustomed seat at the
side, midway between them.

Clara shuddered in taking her cup of coffee from the hand of Dorcas,
and declined the wing of fowl that Craven Le Noir would have put upon
her plate.

Not a word was said upon the subject of the mystery of the preceding
night until Craven Le Noir, without venturing to meet the eyes of the
young girl, said:

"You look very pale, Clara."

"Miss Day was frightened by the cats last night," said Dorcas.

Clara answered never a word. The ridiculous story essayed to be palmed
off upon her credulity in explanation of the night's mystery had not
gained an instant's belief.

She knew that the cry that had startled her from sleep had burst in
strong agony from human lips!

That the helpless weight she had heard dragged down the stairs and
along the whole length of the passage was some dead or insensible human
form!

That the blood she had seen upon the hand of Dorcas Knight was--oh,
heaven! her mind shrank back appalled with horror at the thought which
she dare not entertain! She could only shudder, pray and trust in God.




CHAPTER IX.

CAP FREES THE CAPTIVE.

    Hold, daughter! I do spy a kind of hope,
    Which craves as desperate an execution
    As that is desperate, which we would prevent
    And if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy!
    Hold, then! go home, be merry, give consent
    To marry Paris! Wednesday is to-morrow!

                          --Shakespeare.


As the autumn weather was now very pleasant, Capitola continued her
rides, and, without standing on ceremony, repeated her visit to the
Hidden House. She was, as usual, followed by Wool, who kept at a
respectful distance, and who, during his mistress' visit, remained
outside in attendance upon the horses.

Capitola luckily was in no danger of encountering Colonel Le Noir, who,
since the night of the mysterious tragedy, had not returned home, but
had gone to and settled in his winter quarters in Washington city.

But she again met Craven Le Noir, who, contrary to his usual custom of
accompanying his father upon his annual migrations to the metropolis,
had, upon this occasion, remained home in close attendance upon his
cousin, the wealthy orphan.

Capitola found Clara the same sweet, gentle and patient girl, with this
difference only, that her youthful brow was now overshadowed by a heavy
trouble which could not wholly be explained by her state of orphanage
or her sorrow for the dead--it was too full of anxiety, gloom and
terror to have reference to the past alone.

Capitola saw all this and, trusting in her own powers, would have
sought the confidence of the poor girl, with the view of soothing her
sorrows and helping her out of her difficulties; but Miss Day, candid
upon all other topics, was strangely reserved upon this subject, and
Capitola, with all her eccentricity, was too delicate to seek to
intrude upon the young mourner's sanctuary of grief.

But a crisis was fast approaching which rendered further concealment
difficult and dangerous, and which threw Clara for protection upon the
courage, presence of mind and address of Capitola.

Since Clara Day had parted with her betrothed and had taken up her
residence beneath her guardian's roof, she had regularly written both
to Traverse at St. Louis and to his mother at Staunton. But she had
received no reply from either mother or son. And months had passed,
filling the mind of Clara with anxiety upon their account.

She did not for one moment doubt their constancy. Alas! it required but
little perspicacity on her part to perceive that the letters on either
side must have been intercepted by the Le Noirs--father and son.

Her greatest anxiety was lest Mrs. Rocke and Traverse, failing to hear
from her, should imagine that she had forgotten them. She longed to
assure them that she had not; but how should she do this? It was
perfectly useless to write and send the letter to the post-office by
any servant at the Hidden House, for such a letter was sure to find its
way--not into the mail bags, but into the pocket of Colonel Le Noir.

Finally, Clara resolved to entrust honest Cap with so much of her story
as would engage her interest and co-operation, and then confide to her
care a letter to be placed in the post-office. Clara had scarcely come
to this resolution ere, as we said, an imminent crisis obliged her to
seek the further aid of Capitola.

Craven Le Noir had never abated his unacceptable attentions to the
orphan heiress. Day by day, on the contrary, to Clara's unspeakable
distress, these attentions grew more pointed and alarming.

At first she had received them coldly and repulsed them gently; but as
they grew more ardent and devoted she became colder and more reserved,
until at length, by maintaining a freezing hauteur at variance with her
usually sweet temper, she sought to repel the declaration that was ever
ready to fall from his lips.

But, notwithstanding her evident abhorrence of his suit, Craven Le Noir
persisted in his purpose.

And so one morning he entered the parlor and, finding Clara alone, he
closed the door, seated himself beside her, took her hand and made a
formal declaration of love and proposal of marriage, urging his suit
with all the eloquence of which he was master.

Now, Clara Day, a Christian maiden, a recently bereaved orphan and an
affianced bride, had too profound a regard for her duties toward God,
her father's will and her betrothed husband's rights to treat this
attempted invasion of her faith in any other than the most deliberate,
serious and dignified manner.

"I am very sorry, Mr. Le Noir, that it has at length come to this. I
thought I had conducted myself in such a manner as totally to
discourage any such purpose as this which you have just honored me by
disclosing. Now, however, that the subject may be set at rest forever,
I feel bound to announce to you that my hand is already plighted," said
Clara, gravely.

"But, my fairest and dearest love, your little hand cannot be plighted
without the consent of your guardian, who would never countenance the
impudent pretensions which I understand to be made by the low-born
young man to whom I presume you allude. That engagement was a very
foolish affair, my dear girl, and only to be palliated on the ground of
your extreme childishness at the time of its being made. You must
forget the whole matter, my sweetest love, and prepare yourself to
listen to a suit more worthy of your social position," said Craven Le
Noir, attempting to steal his arm around her waist.

Clara coldly repelled him, saying:

"I am at a loss to understand, Mr. Le Noir, what act of levity on my
part has given you the assurance to offer me this affront!"

"Do you call it an affront, fair cousin, that I lay my hand and heart
and fortune at your feet?"

"I have called your act, sir, by its gentlest name. Under the
circumstances I might well have called it an outrage!"

"And what may be those circumstances that convert an act
of--adoration--into an outrage, my sweet cousin?"

"Sir, you know them well. I have not concealed from you or my guardian
that I am the affianced bride of Doctor Rocke, nor that our troth was
plighted with the full consent of my dear father," said Clara, gravely.

"Tut, tut, tut, my charming cousin, that was mere child's play--a
school-girl's romantic whim. Do not dream that your guardian will ever
permit you to throw yourself away upon that low-bred fellow."

"Mr. Le Noir, if you permit yourself to address me in this manner, I
shall feel compelled to retire. I cannot remain here to have my honored
father's will and memory, and the rights of my betrothed, insulted in
my person!" said Clara, rising to leave the room.

"No--stay! forgive me, Clara! pardon me, gentlest girl, if, in my great
love for you, I grow impatient of any other claim upon your heart,
especially from such an unworthy quarter. Clara, you are a mere child,
full of generous but romantic sentiments and dangerous impulses. You
require extra vigilance and firm exercise of authority on the part of
your guardian to save you from certain self-destruction. And some day,
sweet girl, you will thank us for preserving you from the horrors of
such a msalliance," said Craven Le Noir, gently detaining her.

"I tell you, Mr. Le Noir, that your manner of speaking of my betrothal
is equally insulting to myself, Doctor Rocke and my dear father, who
never would have plighted our hands had he considered our prospective
marriage a msalliance."

"Nor do I suppose he ever did plight your hands--while in his right
senses!"

"Oh, sir, this has been discussed before. I beg of you to let the
subject drop forever, remembering that I hold myself sacredly betrothed
to Traverse Rocke, and ready--when, at my legal majority, he shall
claim me--to redeem my plighted faith by becoming his wife."

"Clara, this is madness! It must not be endured, nor shall not! I have
hitherto sought to win your hand by showing you the great extent of my
love; but be careful how you scorn that love or continue to taunt me
with the mention of an unworthy rival. For, though I use gentle means,
should I find them fail of their purpose, I shall know how to avail
myself of harsher ones."

Clara disdained reply, except by permitting her clear eye to pass over
him from head to foot with an expression of consuming scorn that
scathed him to the quick.

"I tell you to be careful, Clara Day! I come to you armed with the
authority of your legal guardian, my father, Colonel Le Noir, who will
forestall your foolish purpose of throwing yourself and your fortune
away upon a beggar, even though to do so he strain his authority and
coerce you into taking a more suitable companion," said Craven Le Noir,
rising impatiently and pacing the floor. But no sooner had he spoken
these words than he saw how greatly he had injured his cause and
repented them. Going to Clara and intercepting her as she was about to
leave the room, he gently took her hand and, dropping his eyes to the
floor with a look of humility and penitence, he said:

"Clara, my sweet cousin, I know not how sufficiently to express my
sorrow at having been hurried into harshness toward you--toward you
whom I love more than my own soul, and whom it is the fondest wish of
my heart to call wife. I can only excuse myself for this or any future
extravagance of manner by my excessive love for you and the jealousy
that maddens my brain at the bare mention of my rival. That is it,
sweet girl. Can you forgive one whom love and jealousy have hurried
into frenzy?"

"Mr. Le Noir, the Bible enjoins me to forgive injuries. I shall
endeavor, when I can, to forgive you, though for the present my heart
is still burning under the sense of wrongs done toward myself and those
whom I love and esteem, and the only way in which you can make me
forget what has just passed will be--never to repeat the offence." And
with these words Clara bent her head and passed from the room.

Could she have seen the malignant scowl and gesture with which Craven
Le Noir followed her departure, she would scarcely have trusted his
expressions of penitence.

Lifting his arm above his head he fiercely shook his fist after her and
exclaimed:

"Go on, insolent girl, and imagine that you have humbled me; but the
tune shall be changed by this day month, for before that time whatever
power the law gives the husband over his wife and her property shall be
mine over you and your possessions. Then we will see who shall be
insolent; then we shall see whose proud blue eye shall day after day
dare to look up and rebuke me. Oh! to get you in my power, my girl! Not
that I love you, moon-faced creature, but I want your possessions,
which is quite as strong an incentive."

Then he fell into thought. He had an ugly way of scowling and biting
his nails when deeply brooding over any subject, and now he walked
slowly up and down the floor with his head upon his breast, his brows
drawn over his nose and his four fingers between his teeth, gnawing
away like a wild beast, while he muttered:

"She is not like the other one; she has more sense and strength; she
will give us more trouble. We must continue to try fair means a little
longer. It will be difficult, for I am not accustomed to control my
passions, even for a purpose--yet, penitence and love are the only
cards to be played to this insolent girl for the present.
Afterwards!--" Here his soliloquy muttered itself into silence, his
head sank deeper upon his breast, his brows gathered lower over his
nose and he walked and gnawed his nails like a hungry wolf.

The immediate result of this cogitation was that he went into the
library and wrote off a letter to his father, telling him all that had
transpired between himself and Clara, and asking his further counsel.

He dispatched this letter and waited an answer.

During the week that ensued before he could hope to hear from Colonel
Le Noir, he treated Clara with marked deference and respect.

And Clara, on her part, did not tax his forbearance by appearing in his
presence oftener than she could possibly avoid.

At the end of the week the expected letter came. It was short and to
the purpose. It ran thus:

                                        Washington, Dec. 14, 18--

    MY DEAR CRAVEN--You are losing time. Do not hope to win the girl by
    the means you propose. She is too acute to be deceived, and too
    firm to be persuaded. We must not hesitate to use the only possible
    means by which we can coerce her into compliance. I shall follow
    this letter by the first stage coach, and before the beginning of
    the next month Clara Day shall be your wife. Your Affectionate
    Father,

                                        GABRIEL LE NOIR,

    C. LE NOIR, ESQ., Hidden House.

When Craven Le Noir read this letter his thin, white face and deep-set
eyes lighted up with triumph. But Craven Le Noir huzzaed before he was
out of the woods. He had not calculated upon Capitola.

The next day Colonel Le Noir came to the Hidden House. He arrived late
in the afternoon.

After refreshing himself with a bath, a change of clothing and a light
luncheon, he went to the library, where he passed the remainder of the
evening in a confidential conference with his son. Their supper was
ordered to be served up to them there; and for that evening Clara had
the comfort of taking her tea alone.

The result of this conference was that the next morning, after
breakfast, Colonel Le Noir sent for Miss Day to come to him in the
library.

When Clara, nerving her gentle heart to resist a sinful tyranny,
entered the library, Colonel Le Noir arose and courteously handed her
to a chair, and then, seating himself beside her, said:

"My dear Clara, the responsibilities of a guardian are always very
onerous, and his duties not always very agreeable, especially when his
ward is the sole heiress of a large property and the object of pursuit
by fortune hunters and maneuverers, male and female. When such is the
case, the duties and responsibilities of the guardian are augmented a
hundredfold."

"Sir, this cannot be so in my case, since you are perfectly aware that
my destiny is, humanly speaking, already decided," replied Clara, with
gentle firmness.

"As--how, I pray you, my fair ward?"

"You cannot possibly be at a loss to understand, sir. You have been
already advised that I am betrothed to Doctor Rocke, who will claim me
as his wife upon the day that I shall complete my twenty-first year."

"Miss Clara Day! no more of that, I beseech you! It is folly, perversity,
frenzy! But, thanks to the wisdom of legislators, the law very properly
invests the guardian with great latitude of discretionary power of the
person and property of his ward--to be used, of course, for that ward's
best interest. And thus, my dear Clara, it is my duty, while holding
this power over you, to exercise it for preventing the possibility of
your ever--either now or at any future time, throwing yourself away
upon a mere adventurer. To do this, I must provide you with a suitable
husband. My son, Mr. Craven Le Noir, has long loved and wooed you. He
is a young man of good reputation and fair prospects. I entirely
approve his suit, and as your guardian I command you to receive him for
your destined husband."

"Colonel Le Noir, this is no time 'for bated breath and whispered
humbleness.' I am but a simple girl of seventeen, but I understand your
purpose and that of your son just as well as though I were an old man
of the world. You are the fortune hunters and maneuverers! It is the
fortune of the wealthy heiress and friendless orphan that you are in
pursuit of! But that fortune, like my hand and heart, is already
promised to one I love; and, to speak very plainly to you, I would die
ere I would disappoint him or wed your son," said Clara, with
invincible firmness.

"Die, girl! There are worse things than death in the world!" said
Colonel Le Noir, with a threatening glare.

"I know it! and one of the worst things in the world would be a union
with a man I could neither esteem nor even endure!" exclaimed Clara.

Colonel Le Noir saw that there was no use in further disguise. Throwing
off, then, the last restraints of good breeding, he said:

"And there are still more terrible evils for a woman than to be the
wife of one she 'can neither esteem nor endure!'"

Clara shook her head in proud scorn.

"There are evils to escape which such a woman would go down upon her
bended knees to be made the wife of such a man."

Clara's gentle eyes flashed with indignation.

"Infamous!" she cried. "You slander all womanhood in my person!"

"The evils to which I allude are--comprised in--a life of dishonor!"
hissed Le Noir through his set teeth.

"This to my father's daughter!" exclaimed Clara, growing white as death
at the insult.

"Aye, my girl! It is time we understood each other. You are in my
power, and I intend to coerce you to my will!"

These words, accompanied as they were by a look that left no doubt upon
her mind that he would carry out his purpose to any extremity, so
appalled the maiden's soul that she stood like one suddenly struck with
catalepsy.

The unscrupulous wretch then approached her and said:

"I am now going to the county seat to take out a marriage license for
you and my son. I shall have the carriage at the door by six o'clock
this evening, when I desire that you shall be ready to accompany us to
church, where a clerical friend will be in attendance to perform the
marriage ceremony. Clara Day, if you would save your honor, look to
this!"

All this time Clara had neither moved nor spoken nor breathed. She had
stood cold, white and still as if turned to stone.

"Let no vain hope of escape delude your mind. The doors will be kept
locked; the servants are all warned not to suffer you to leave the
house. Look to it, Clara, for the rising of another sun shall see my
purpose accomplished!"

And with these words the atrocious wretch left the room. His departure
took off the dreadful spell that had paralyzed Clara's life; her blood
began to circulate again; breath came to her lungs and speech to her
lips.

"Oh, Lord," she cried, "oh, Lord, who delivered the children from the
fiery furnace, deliver thy poor handmaiden now from her terrible foes!"

While she thus prayed she saw upon the writing table before her a small
penknife. Her cheeks flushed and her eyes brightened as she seized it.

"This! this!" she said, "this small instrument is sufficient to save
me! Should the worst ensue, I know where to find the carotid artery,
and even such a slight puncture as my timorous hand could make would
set my spirit free! Oh, my father! oh, my father! you little thought
when you taught your Clara the mysteries of anatomy to what a fearful
use she would put your lessons! And would it be right? Oh, would it be
right? One may desire death, but can anything justify suicide? Oh,
Father in heaven, guide me! guide me!" cried Clara, falling upon her
knees and sobbing forth this prayer of agony.

Soon approaching footsteps drew her attention. And she had only time to
rise and put back her damp, disheveled hair from her tear-stained face
before the door opened and Dorcas Knight appeared and said:

"Here is this young woman come again."

"I declare, Miss Day," said Cap, laughing, "you have the most
accomplished, polite and agreeable servants here that I ever met with!
Think with what a courteous welcome this woman received me--'Here you
are again!' she said. 'You'll come once too often for your own good,
and that I tell you.' I answered that every time I came it appeared to
be once too often for her liking. She rejoined, 'The colonel has come
home, and he don't like company, so I advise you to make your call a
short one.' I assured her that I should measure the length of my visit
by the breadth of my will---- But good angels, Clara! what is the matter?
You look worse than death!" exclaimed Capitola, noticing for the first
time the pale, wild, despairing face of her companion.

Clara clasped her hands as if in prayer and raised her eyes with an
appealing gaze into Capitola's face.

"Tell me, dear Clara, what is the matter? How can I help you? What
shall I do for you?" said our heroine.

Before trusting herself to reply, Clara gazed wistfully into Capitola's
eyes, as though she would have read her soul.

Cap did not blanch nor for an instant avert her own honest, gray orbs;
she let Clara gaze straight down through those clear windows of the
soul into the very soul itself, where she found only truth, honesty and
courage.

The scrutiny seemed to be satisfactory for Clara soon took the hand of
her visitor and said:

"Capitola, I will tell you. It is a horrid, horrid story, but you shall
know all. Come with me to my chamber."

Cap pressed the hand that was so confidingly placed in hers and
accompanied Clara to her room, where, after the latter had taken the
precaution to lock the door, the two girls sat down for a confidential
talk.

Clara, like the author of Robin Hood's Barn, "began at the beginning"
of her story, and told everything--her betrothal to Traverse Rocke; the
sudden death of her father; the decision of the Orphans' Court; the
departure of Traverse for the far West; her arrival at the Hidden
House; the interruption of all her epistolary correspondence with her
betrothed and his mother; the awful and mysterious occurrences of that
dreadful night when she suspected some heinous crime had been
committed; and finally of the long, unwelcome suit of Craven Le Noir
and the present attempt to force him upon her as a husband.

Cap listened very calmly to this story, showing very little sympathy,
for there was not a bit of sentimentality about our Cap.

"And now," whispered Clara, while the pallor of horror overspread her
face, "by threatening me with a fate worse than death, they would drive
me to marry Craven Le Noir!"

"Yes, I know I would!" said Cap, as if speaking to herself, but by her
tone and manner clothing these simple words in the very keenest
sarcasm.

"What would you do, Capitola?" asked Clara, raising her tearful eyes to
the last speaker.

"Marry Mr. Craven Le Noir and thank him, too!" said Cap. Then, suddenly
changing her tone, she exclaimed:

"I wish--oh! how I wish it was only me in your place--that it was only
me they were trying to marry against my will!"

"What would you do?" asked Clara, earnestly.

"What would I do? Oh! wouldn't I make them know the difference between
their Sovereign Lady and Sam the Lackey? If I had been in your place
and that dastard Le Noir had said to me what he said to you, I do
believe I should have stricken him dead with the lightning of my eyes!
But what shall you do, my poor Clara?"

"Alas! alas! see here! this is my last resort!" replied the unhappy
girl, showing the little pen-knife.

"Put it away from you! put it away from you!" exclaimed Capitola
earnestly, "suicide is never, never, never justifiable! God is the Lord
of life and death! He is the only judge whether a mortal's sorrows are
to be relieved by death, and when He does not Himself release you, He
means that you shall live and endure! That proves that suicide is never
right, let the Roman pagans have said and done what they pleased. So no
more of that! There are enough other ways of escape for you!"

"Ah! what are they? You would give me life by teaching me how to
escape!" said Clara, fervently.

"The first and most obvious means that suggests itself to my mind,"
said Cap, "is to--run away!"

"Ah! that is impossible. The servants are warned; the doors are all
locked; I am watched!"

"Then the next plan is equally obvious. Consent to go with them to the
church, and when you get there, denounce them and claim the protection
of the clergyman!"

"Ah! dear girl, that is still more impracticable. The officiating
clergyman is their friend, and even if I could consent to act a
deceitful part, and should go to church as if to marry Craven and upon
getting there denounce him, instead of receiving the protection of the
clergyman I should be restored to the hands of my legal guardian and be
brought back here to meet a fate worse than death," said Clara, in a
tone of despair.

Capitola did not at once reply, but fell into deep thought, which
lasted many minutes. Then, speaking more gravely than she had spoken
before, she said:

"There is but one plan of escape left, your only remaining chance, and
that full of danger!"

"Oh, why should I fear danger? What evil can befall me so great as that
which now threatens me?" said Clara.

"This plan requires on your part great courage, self-control and
presence of mind."

"Teach me! teach me, dear Capitola. I will be an apt pupil!"

"I have thought it all out, and will tell you my plan. It is now eleven
o'clock in the forenoon, and the carriage is to come for you at six
this evening, I believe?"

"Yes! yes!"

"Then you have seven hours in which to save yourself! And this is my
plan: First, Clara, you must change clothes with me, giving me your
suit of mourning and putting on my riding habit, hat and veil! Then,
leaving me here in your place, you are to pull the veil down closely
over your face and walk right out of the house! No one will speak to
you, for they never do to me. When you have reached the park, spring
upon my horse and put whip to him for the village of Tip Top. My
servant, Wool, will ride after you, but not speak to you or approach
near enough to discover your identity--for he has been ordered by his
master to keep me in sight, and he has been forbidden by his mistress
to intrude upon her privacy. You will reach Tip Top by three o'clock,
when the Staunton stage passes through. You may then reveal yourself to
Wool, give my horse into his charge, get into the coach and start for
Staunton. Upon reaching that place, put yourself under the protection
of your friends, the two old physicians, and get them to prosecute your
guardian for cruelty and flagrant abuse of authority. Be cool, firm and
alert, and all will be well!"

Clara, who had listened to this little Napoleon in petticoats with
breathless interest, now clasped her hands in a wild ecstasy of joy and
exclaimed:

"I will try it! Oh, Capitola, I will try it! Heaven bless you for the
counsel!"

"Be quick, then; change your dress! provide yourself with a purse of
money, and I will give you particular directions how to make a short
cut for Tip Top. Ha, ha, ha! when they come for the bride she will be
already rolling on the turnpike between Tip Top and Staunton!"

"But you! Oh, you, my generous deliverer?"

"I shall dress myself in your clothes and stay here in your place to
keep you from being missed, so as to give you full time to make your
escape."

"But--you will place yourself in the enraged lion's jaws! You will
remain in the power of two men who know neither justice nor mercy! Who,
in their love or their hate, fear neither God nor man! Oh, Capitola!
how can I take an advantage of your generosity, and leave you here in
such extreme peril? Capitola, I cannot do it!"

"Well, then, I believe, you must be anxious to marry Craven Le Noir!"

"Oh, Capitola!"

"Well, if you are not, hurry and get ready; there is no time to be
lost!"

"But you! but you, my generous friend!"

"Never mind me. I shall be safe enough! I am not afraid of the Le
Noirs. Bless their wigs; I should like to see them make me blanch. On
the contrary, I desire above all things to be pitted against these two!
How I shall enjoy their disappointment and rage! Oh, it will be a rare
frolic!"

While Capitola was speaking she was also busily engaged doing. She went
softly to the door and turned the key in the lock, to prevent any one
from looking through the keyhole, murmuring as she did it:

"I wasn't brought up among the detective policemen for nothing!"

Then she began to take off her riding-habit. Quickly she dressed Clara,
superintending all the details of her disguise as carefully as though
she were the costumer of a new debutante. When Clara was dressed she
was so nearly of the same size and shape of Capitola that from behind
no one would have suspected her identity.

"There, Clara! tuck your light hair out of the way; pull your cap over
your eyes; gather your veil down close; draw up your figure; throw back
your head; walk with a little springy sway and swagger, as if you
didn't care a damson for anybody, and--there! I declare no one could
tell you from me!" exclaimed Capitola in delight, as she completed the
disguise and the instructions of Clara.

Then Capitola dressed herself in Clara's deep mourning robes. And then
the two girls sat down to compose themselves for a few minutes, while
Capitola gave new and particular directions for Clara's course and
conduct, so as to insure as far as human foresight could do it, the
safe termination of her perilous adventure. By the time they had ended
their talk the hall clock struck twelve.

"There! it is full time you should be off! Be calm, be cool, be firm,
and God bless you, Clara! Dear girl! if I were only a young man I would
deliver you by the strength of my own arms, without subjecting you to
inconvenience or danger!" said Cap, gallantly, as she led Clara to the
chamber door and carefully gathered her thick veil in close folds over
her face, so as entirely to conceal it.

"Oh, may the Lord in heaven bless and preserve and reward you, my
brave, my noble, my heroic Capitola!" said Clara, fervently, with the
tears rushing to her eyes.

"Bosh!" said Cap. "If you go doing the sentimental you won't look like
me a bit, and that will spoil all. There! keep your veil close, for
it's windy, you know; throw back your head and fling yourself along
with a swagger, as if you didn't care, ahem! for anybody, and--there
you are!" said Cap, pushing Clara out and shutting the door behind her.

Clara paused an instant to offer up one short, fervent prayer for her
success and Capitola's safety, and then following her instructions,
went on.

Nearly all girls are clever imitators, and Clara readily adopted
Capitola's light, springy, swaying walk, and met old Dorcas Knight in
the hall, without exciting the slightest suspicion of her identity.

"Humph!" said the woman; "so you are going! I advise you not to come
back again!"

Clara threw up her head with a swagger, and went on.

"Very well, you may scorn my words, but if you know your own good
you'll follow my advice!" said Dorcas Knight, harshly.

Clara flung up her head and passed out.

Before the door Wool was waiting with the horses. Keeping her face
closely muffled, Clara went to Capitola's pony. Wool came and helped
her into the saddle, saying:

"Yer does right, Miss Cap, to keep your face kivered; it's awful windy,
ain't it, though? I kin scarcely keep the har from blowing offen my
head."

With an impatient jerk after the manner of Capitola, Clara signified
that she did not wish to converse. Wool dropped obediently behind,
mounted his horse and followed at a respectful distance until Clara
turned her horse's head and took the bridle-path toward Tip Top. This
move filled poor Wool with dismay. Riding toward her, he exclaimed:

"'Deed, Miss Cap, yer mus' scuse me for speakin' now! Whar de muschief
is yer a-goin' to?"

For all answer Clara, feigning the temper of Capitola, suddenly wheeled
her horse, elevated her riding whip and galloped upon Wool in a
threatening manner.

Wool dodged and backed his horse with all possible expedition,
exclaiming in consternation:

"Dar! dar! Miss Cap, I won't go for to ax you any more questions--no--not
if yer rides straight to Old Nick or Black Donald!"

Whereupon, receiving this apology in good part, Clara again turned her
horse's head and rode on her way.

Wool followed, bemoaning the destiny that kept him between the two
fierce fires of his old master's despotism and his young mistress's
caprice, and muttering:

"I know old marse and dis young gal am goin' to be the death of me! I
knows it jes' as well as nuffin at all! I 'clare to man, if it ain't
nuf to make anybody go heave themselves right into a grist mill and be
ground up at once."

Wool spoke no more until they got to Tip Top, when Clara still closely
veiled, rode up to the stage office just as the coach, half filled with
passengers, was about to start. Springing from her horse, she went up
to Wool and said:

"Here, man, take this horse back to Hurricane Hall! Tell Major Warfield
that Miss Black remains at the Hidden House in imminent danger! Ask him
to ride there and bring her home! Tell Miss Black when you see her that
I reached Tip Top safe and in time to take the coach. Tell her I will
never cease to be grateful! And now, here is a half eagle for your
trouble! Good-by, and God bless you!" And she put the piece in his hand
and took her place in the coach, which immediately started.

As for Wool! From the time that Clara had thrown aside her veil and
began to speak to him he had stood staring and staring--his consternation
growing and growing--until it had seemed to have turned him into
stone--from which state of petrefaction he did not recover until he saw
the stage coach roll rapidly away, carrying off--whom?--Capitola, Clara
or the evil one?--Wool could not have told which! He presently
astounded the people about the stage office by leaving his horses and
taking to his heels after the stage coach, vociferating:

"Murder! murder! help! help! stop thief! stop thief! stop the coach!
stop the coach!"

"What is the matter, man?" said a constable, trying to head him.

But Wool incontinently ran over that officer, throwing him down and
keeping on his headlong course, hat off, coat-tail streaming and legs
and arms flying like the sails of a windmill, as he tried to overtake
the coach, crying:

"Help! murder! head the horses! Stop the coach! Old marse told me not
to lose sight of her! Oh, for hebben's sake, good people, stop the
coach!"

When he got to a gate, instead of taking time to open it, he rolled
himself somersault-like right over it! When he met man or woman,
instead of turning from his straight course, he knocked them over and
passed on, garments flying and legs and arms circulating with the
velocity of a wheel.

The people whom he had successively met and overthrown in his course,
picking themselves up and getting into the village, reported that there
was a furious madman broke loose, who attacked every one he met.

And soon every man and boy in the village who could mount a horse
started in pursuit. Only race horses would have beaten the speed with
which Wool ran, urged on by fear. It was nine miles on the turnpike
road from Tip Top that the horsemen overtook and surrounded Wool, who,
seeing himself hopelessly environed, fell down upon the ground and
rolled and kicked, swearing that he would not be taken alive to have
his eyelids cut off!

It was not until after a desperate resistance that he was finally
taken, bound, put in a wagon and carried back to the village, where he
was recognized as Major Warfield's man and a messenger was despatched
for his master.

And not until he had been repeatedly assured that no harm should befall
him did Wool gain composure enough to say, amid tears of cruel grief
and fear:

"Oh, marsers! my young missus, Miss Black, done been captured and
bewitched and turned into somebody else, right afore my own two looking
eyes and gone off in dat coach! 'deed she is! and ole marse kill me!
'deed he will, gemmen! He went and ordered me not to take my eyes offen
her, and no more I didn't! But what good that do, when she turned to
somebody else, and went off right afore my two looking eyes? But ole
marse won't listen to reason. He kill me, I know he will!" whimpered
Wool, refusing to be comforted.




CHAPTER X.

CAP IN CAPTIVITY.

    I lingered here and rescue planned
    For Clara and for me.

                          --Scott.


Meanwhile how fared it with Capitola in the Hidden House?

"I am in for it now!" said Cap, as she closed the door behind Clara; "I
am in for it now! This is a jolly imprudent adventure! What will Wool
do when he discovers that he has 'lost sight' of me? What will uncle
say when he finds out what I've done? Whe--ew! Uncle will explode! I
wonder if the walls at Hurricane Hall will be strong enough to stand
it! Wool will go mad! I doubt if he will ever do a bit more good in
this world!

"But above all, I wonder what the Le Noirs, father and son, will say
when they find that the heiress is flown and a 'beggar,' as uncle
flatters me by calling me, will be here in her place! Whe--ew--ew--ew!
There will be a tornado! Cap, child, they'll murder you! That's just
what they'll do! They'll kill and eat you, Cap, without any salt! or
they may lock you up in the haunted room to live with the ghost, Cap,
and that would be worse!

"Hush! here comes Dorcas Knight! Now I must make believe I'm Clara, and
do the sentimental up brown!" concluded Capitola, as she seated herself
near the door where she could be heard, and began to sob softly.

Dorcas rapped.

Cap sobbed in response.

"Are you coming to luncheon, Miss Day?" inquired the woman.

"Ee--hee! Ee--hee! Ee--hee! I do not want to eat," sobbed Cap, in a low
and smothered voice. Any one would have thought she was drowned in
tears.

"Very well; just as you like," said the woman harshly, as she went
away.

"Well, I declare," laughed Cap, "I did that quite as well as an actress
could! But now what am I to do? How long can I keep this up? Heigh-ho
'let the world slide!' I'll not reveal myself until I'm driven to it,
for when I do----! Cap, child, you'll get chawed right up!"

A little later in the day Dorcas Knight came again and rapped at the
door.

"Ee--hee! Eeh--hee! Ee--hee!" sobbed Cap.

"Miss Day, your cousin, Craven Le Noir, wishes to speak with you
alone."

"Ee--hee! Ee--hee! Ee--hee! I cannot see him!" sobbed Cap, in a low and
suffocating voice.

The woman went away, and Cap suffered no other interruption until six
o'clock, when Dorcas Knight once more rapped saying:

"Miss Day, your uncle is at the front door with the carriage, and he
wishes to know if you are ready to obey him.

"Ee--hee! Ee--hee! Ee--hee!--te--te--tell him yes!" sobbed Cap, as if
her heart would break.

The woman went off with this answer, and Capitola hastily enveloped her
form in Clara's large, black shawl, put on Clara's black bonnet and
tied her thick mourning veil closely over her face.

"A pretty bridal dress, this; but, however, I suppose these men are no
more particular about my costume than they are about their own
conduct," said Cap.

She had just drawn on her gloves when she heard the footsteps of two
men approaching. They rapped at the door.

"Come in," she sobbed, in a low, broken voice, that might have belonged
to any girl in deep distress, and she put a white cambric handkerchief
up to her eyes and drew her thick veil closely over her face.

The two Le Noirs immediately entered the room. Craven approached her
and whispered, softly:

"You will forgive me this, my share in these proceedings after awhile,
sweet Clara! The Sabine women did not love the Roman youths the less
that they were forcibly made wives by them."

"Ee--hee! Ee--hee! Ee--hee!" sobbed Cap, entirely concealing her white
cambric handkerchief under her impenetrable veil.

"Come, come! we lose time!" said the elder Le Noir. "Draw her arm
within yours, Craven, and lead her out."

The young man did as he was directed and led Cap from the room. It was
now quite dark--the long, dreary passage was only dimly lighted by a
hanging lamp, so that with the care she took there was scarcely a
possibility of Capitola's being discovered. They went on, Craven Le
Noir whispering hypocritical apologies and Cap replying only by low
sobs.

When they reached the outer door they found a close carriage drawn up
before the house.

To this Craven Le Noir led Capitola, placed her within and took the
seat by her side. Colonel Le Noir followed and placed himself in the
front seat opposite them. And the carriage was driven rapidly off.

An hour's ride brought the party to an obscure church in the depths of
the forest, which Capitola recognized by the cross on its top to be a
Roman Catholic chapel.

Here the carriage drew up and the two Le Noirs got out and assisted
Capitola to alight.

They then led her into the church, which was dimly illumined by a pair
of wax candles burning before the altar. A priest in his sacerdotal
robes was in attendance. A few country people were scattered thinly
about among the pews, at their private devotions.

Guarded by Craven Le Noir on the right and Colonel Le Noir on the left,
Capitola was marched up the aisle and placed before the altar.

Colonel Le Noir then went and spoke apart to the officiating priest,
saying, in a tone of dissatisfaction:

"I told you, sir, that as our bride was an orphan, recently bereaved,
and still in deep mourning, we wished the marriage ceremony to be
strictly private, and you gave me to understand, sir, that at this hour
the chapel was most likely to be vacant. Yet, here I find a half a
score of people! How is this?"

"Sir," replied the priest, "it is true that at this hour of the evening
the chapel is most likely to be vacant, but it is not therefore certain
to be so! nor did I promise as much! Our chapel is, as you know, open
at all hours of the day and night, that all who please may come and
pray. These people that you see are hard-working farm laborers, who
have no time to come in the day, and who are now here to offer up their
evening prayers, and also, some of them, to examine their consciences
preparatory to confession! They can certainly be no interruption to
this ceremony."

"Egad, I don't know that!" muttered Colonel Le Noir between his teeth.

As for Cap, the sight of other persons present in the chapel filled her
heart with joy and exultation, inasmuch as it insured her final safety.
And so she just abandoned herself to the spirit of frolic that
possessed her, and anticipated with the keenest relish the dnouement
of her strange adventure.

"Well, what are we waiting for? Proceed, sir, proceed!" said Colonel Le
Noir as he took Cap by the shoulders and placed her on the left side of
his son, while he himself stood behind ready to "give the bride away."

The ceremony immediately commenced.

The prologue beginning, "Dearly beloved, we are gathered together
here," etc., etc., etc., was read.

The solemn exhortation to the contracting parties, commencing "I
require and charge ye both, as ye shall answer in the dreadful day of
judgment when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, that if
either of you know any just cause or impediment why ye may not lawfully
be joined together," etc., etc., etc., followed.

Capitola listened to all this with the deepest attention, saying to
herself: "Well, I declare, this getting married is really awfully
interesting! If it were not for Herbert Greyson, I'd just let it go
right straight on to the end and see what would happen next!"

While Cap was making these mental comments the priest was asking the
bridegroom:

"Wilt thou have this woman to be thy wedded wife," etc., etc., etc.,
"so long as ye both shall live?"

To which Craven Le Noir, in a sonorous voice responded:

"I will."

"Indeed you will? We'll see that presently!" said Cap to herself.

The priest then turning toward the bride, inquired:

"Wilt thou have this man to be thy wedded husband, etc., etc., etc.,
so long as ye both shall live?"

To which the bride, throwing aside her veil, answered, firmly:

"No! not if he were the last man and I the last woman on the face of
the earth and the human race was about to become extinct and the angel
of Gabriel came down from above to ask it of me as a personal favor."

The effect of this outburst, this revelation, this explosion, may be
imagined but can never be adequately described.

The priest dropped his book and stood with lifted hands and open mouth
and staring eyes as though he had raised a ghost!

The two Le Noirs simultaneously sprang forward, astonishment,
disappointment and rage contending in their blanched faces.

"Who are you, girl?" exclaimed Colonel Le Noir.

"Capitola Black, your honor's glory!" she replied, making a deep
curtsey.

"What the foul fiend is the meaning of all this?" in the same breath
inquired the father and son.

Cap put her thumb on the side of her nose, and, whirling her four
fingers, replied:

"It means, your worships' excellencies, that--you--can't come it! it's
no go! this chicken won't fight. It means that the fat's in the fire,
and the cat's out of the bag! It means confusion! distraction!
perdition! and a tearing off of our wigs! It means the game's up, the
play's over, villainy is about to be hanged and virtue about to be
married, and the curtain is going to drop and the principal
performer--that's I--is going to be called out amid the applause of the
audience!" Then, suddenly changing her mocking tone to one of great
severity, she said:

"It means that you have been outwitted by a girl! It means that your
purposed victim has fled, and is by this time in safety! It means that
you two, precious father and son, would be a pair of knaves if you had
sense enough; but, failing in that, you are only a pair of fools!"

By this time the attention of the few persons in the church was
aroused. They all arose to their feet to look and listen, and some of
them left their places and approached the altar. And to these latter
Capitola now suddenly turned and said, aloud:

"Good people, I am Capitola Black, the niece and ward of Major Ira
Warfield, of Hurricane Hall, whom you all know, and now I claim your
protection while I shall tell you the meaning of my presence here!"

"Don't listen to her. She is a maniac!" cried Colonel Le Noir.

"Stop her mouth!" cried Craven, springing upon Capitola and holding her
tightly in the grasp of his right arm, while he covered her lips and
nostrils with his large left hand.

Capitola struggled so fiercely to free herself that Craven had enough
to do to hold her, and so was not aware of a ringing footstep coming up
the aisle, until a stunning blow dealt from a strong arm covered his
face with blood and stretched him out at Capitola's feet.

Cap flushed, breathless and confused, looked up and was caught to the
bosom of Herbert Greyson, who, pale with concentrated rage, held her
closely and inquired:

"Capitola! What violence is this which has been done you? Explain! who
is the aggressor?"

"Wai--wai--wait until I get my breath! There! that was good! That
villain has all but strangled me to death? Oh, Herbert, I'm so
delighted you've come! How is it that you always drop right down at the
right time and on the right spot?" said Cap, while gasping for breath.

"I will tell you another time! Now I want an explanation."

"Yes, Herbert; I also wish to explain--not only to you but to these
gaping, good people! Let me have a hearing!" said Cap.

"She is mad! absolutely mad!" cried Colonel Le Noir, who was assisting
his son to rise.

"Silence, sir!" thundered Herbert Greyson, advancing toward him with
uplifted and threatening hand.

"Gentlemen! gentlemen! pray remember that you are within the walls of a
church!" said the distressed priest.

"Craven, this is no place for us; let us go and pursue our fugitive
ward," whispered Colonel Le Noir to his son.

"We might as well; for it is clear that all is over here!" replied
Craven. And the two baffled villains turned to leave the place. But
Herbert Greyson, speaking up, said:

"Good people, prevent the escape of those men until we hear what this
young lady has to say! that we may judge whether to let them go or to
take them before a magistrate."

The people flew to the doors and windows and secured them, and then
surrounded the two Le Noirs, who found themselves prisoners.

"Now, Capitola, tell us how it is that you are here!" said Herbert
Greyson.

"Well, that elder man," said Cap, "is the guardian of a young heiress
who was betrothed to a worthy young man, one Doctor Traverse Rocke."

"My friend!" interrupted Herbert.

"Yes, Mr. Greyson, your friend! Their engagement was approved by the
young lady's father, who gave them his dying blessing. Nevertheless, in
the face of all this, this 'guardian' here, appointed by the Orphans'
Court to take charge of the heiress and her fortune, undertakes, for
his own ends, to compel the young lady to break her engagement and
marry his own son! To drive her to this measure, he does not hesitate
to use every species of cruelty. This night he was to have forced her
to this altar! But in the interval, to-day, I chanced to visit her at
the house where she was confined. Being informed by her of her
distressing situation, and having no time to help her in any better
way, I just changed clothes with her. She escaped unsuspected in my
dress. And those two heroes there, mistaking me for her, forced me into
a carriage and dragged me hither to be married against my will. And
instead of catching an heiress, they caught a Tartar, that's all! And
now, Herbert, let the two poor wretches go hide their mortification,
and do you take me home, for I am immensely tired of doing the
sentimental, making speeches and piling up the agonies!"

While Cap was delivering this long oration, the two Le Noirs had made
several essays to interrupt and contradict her, but were effectually
prevented by the people, whose sympathies were all with the speaker.
Now, at Herbert Greyson's command, they released the culprits, who,
threatening loudly took their departure.

Herbert then led Capitola out and placed her upon her own pony, Gyp,
which, to her unbounded astonishment, she found there in charge of
Wool, who was also mounted upon his own hack.

Herbert Greyson threw himself into the saddle of a third horse, and the
three took the road to Hurricane Hall.

"And now," said Capitola, as Herbert rode up to her side, "for mercy
sake tell me, before I go crazy with conjecture, how it happened that
you dropped down from the sky at the very moment and on the very spot
where you were needed? and where did you light upon Wool and the
horses?"

"It is very simple when you come to understand it," said Herbert,
smiling. "In the first place, you know, I graduated at the last
commencement."

"Yes."

"Well, I have just received a lieutenant's commission in a regiment
that is ordered to join General Scott in Mexico."

"Oh, Herbert, that is news, and I don't know whether to be in despair
or in ecstasy!" said Cap, ready to laugh or cry, as a feather's weight
might tip the scales in which she balanced Herbert's new honors with
his approaching perils.

"If there's any doubt about it, I decidedly recommend the latter
emotion," said Herbert, laughing.

"When do you go?" inquired Cap.

"Our regiment embarks from Baltimore on the first of next month.
Meanwhile I got leave of absence to come and spend a week with my
friends at home!"

"Oh, Herbert, I--I am in a quandary! But you haven't told me yet how
you happened to meet Wool and to come here just in the nick of time!"

"I am just going to do so. Well, you see Capitola, I came down in the
stage to Tip Top, which I reached about three o'clock. And there I
found Wool in the hands of the Philistines, suspected of being mad,
from the manner in which he raved about losing sight of you. Well, of
course, like a true knight, I delivered my lady's squire, comforted and
reassured him and made him mount his own horse and take charge of
yours. After which I mounted the best beast that I had hired to convey
me to Hurricane Hall, and we all set off thither. I confess that I was
excessively anxious upon your account, for I could make nothing
whatever of Wool's wild story of your supposed metamorphosis! I thought
it best to make a circuit and take the Hidden House in our course, to
make some inquiries there as to what had really happened. I had got a
little bewildered between the dark night and the strange road, and,
seeing the light in the church, I had just ridden up to inquire my way,
when to my astonishment I saw you within, before the altar, struggling
in the grasp of that ruffian. And you know the rest! And now let us
ride on quickly, for I have a strong presentiment that Major Warfield
is suffering the tortures of a lost soul through anxiety upon your
account," concluded Herbert Greyson.

"Please, Marse Herbert and Miss Cap, don't you tell ole marse nuffin
'tall 'bout my loosin' sight of you!" pleaded Wool.

"We shall tell your old master all about it, Wool, for I would not have
him miss the pleasure of hearing this adventure upon any account; but I
promise to bear you harmless through it," said Herbert, as they
galloped rapidly toward home.

They reached Hurricane Hall by eight o'clock, and in good time for
supper. They found Old Hurricane storming all over the house, and
ordering everybody off the premises in his fury of anxiety upon
Capitola's account. But when the party arrived, surprise at seeing them
in the company of Herbert Greyson quite revolutionized his mood, and,
forgetting to rage, he gave them all a hearty welcome.

And when after supper was over and they were all gathered around the
comfortable fireside, and Herbert related the adventures and feats of
Capitola at the Hidden House, and in the forest chapel, the old man
grasped the hand of his favorite and with his stormy old eyes full of
rain said:

"You deserve to have been a man, Cap! Indeed you do, my girl!"

That was his highest style of praise.

Then Herbert told his own little story of getting his commission and
being ordered to Mexico.

"God bless you, lad, and save you in the battle and bring you home with
victory!" was Old Hurricane's comment.

Then seeing that the young people were quite worn out with fatigue, and
feeling not averse to his own comfortable couch, Old Hurricane broke up
the circle and they all retired to rest.




CHAPTER XI.

AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR AT MARAH'S COTTAGE.

    "Friend wilt thou give me shelter here?
    The stranger meekly saith
    My life is hunted! evil men
    Are following on my path."


Marah Rocke sat by her lonely fireside.

The cottage was not changed in any respect since the day upon which we
first of all found her there. There was the same bright, little wood
fire; the same clean hearth and the identical faded carpet on the
floor. There was the dresser with its glistening crockery ware on the
right, and the shelves with Traverse's old school books on the left of
the fireplace.

The widow herself had changed in nothing except that her clean black
dress was threadbare and rusty, and her patient face whiter and thinner
than before.

And now there was no eager restlessness; no frequent listening and
looking toward the door. Alas! she could not now expect to hear her
boy's light and springing step and cheerful voice as he hurried home at
eventide from his daily work. Traverse was far away at St. Louis
undergoing the cares and trials of a friendless young physician trying
to get into practice. Six months had passed since he took leave of her,
and there was as yet no hope of his returning even to pay a visit.

So Marah sat very still and sad, bending over her needlework without
ever turning her head in the direction of the door. True, he wrote to
her every week. No Wednesday ever passed without bringing her a letter
written in a strong, buoyant and encouraging strain. Still she missed
Traverse very sadly. It was dreary to rise up in the empty house every
morning; dreary to sit down to her solitary meals, and drearier still
to go to bed in her lonely room without having received her boy's kiss
and heard his cheerful good-night. And it was her custom every night to
read over Traverse's last letter before retiring to bed.

It was getting on toward ten o'clock when she folded up her work and
put it away and drew her boy's latest epistle from her bosom to read.
It ran as follows:

                                          St. Louis, Dec. 1st, 184--.

    My dearest Mother--I am very glad to hear that you continue in good
    health, and that you do not work too hard, or miss me too sadly. It
    is the greatest comfort of my life to hear good news of you, sweet
    mother. I count the days from one letter to another, and read every
    last letter over daily until I get a new one. You insist upon my
    telling you how I am getting on, and whether I am out of money. I
    am doing quite well, ma'am, and have some funds left! I have quite
    a considerable practice. It is true that my professional services
    are in request only among the very poor, who pay me with their
    thanks and good wishes. But I am very glad to be able to pay off a
    small part of the great debt of gratitude I owe to the benevolent
    of this world by doing all that I can in my turn for the needy. And
    even if I had never myself been the object of a good man's
    benevolence, I should still have desired to serve the indigent;
    "for whoso giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord," and I "like the
    security." Therefore, sweet mother of mine, be at ease; for I am
    getting on swimmingly--with one exception. Still I do not hear from
    our Clara! Six months have now passed, during which, despite of her
    seeming silence, I have written to her every week; but not one
    letter or message have I received from her in return! And now you
    tell me also that you have not received a single letter from her
    either! I know not what to think. Anxiety upon her account is my
    one sole trouble! Not that I wrong the dear girl by one instant's
    doubt of her constancy--no! my soul upon her truth! if I could do
    that, I should be most unworthy of her love! No, mother, you and I
    know that Clara is true! But ah! we do not know to what sufferings
    she may be subjected by Le Noir, who I firmly believe has
    intercepted all our letters. Mother, I am about to ask a great,
    perhaps an unreasonable, favor of you! It is to go down into the
    neighborhood of the Hidden House and make inquiries and try to find
    out Clara's real condition. If it be possible, put yourself into
    communication with her, and tell her that I judge her heart by my
    own, and have the firmest faith in her constancy, even though I
    have written to her every week for six months without ever having
    received an answer. I feel that I am putting you to expense and
    trouble, but my great anxiety about Clara, which I am sure you
    share, must be my excuse. I kiss your dear and honored hands, and
    remain ever your loving son and faithful servant.

                                          TRAVERSE ROCKE.

"I must try to go. It will be an awful expense, because I know no one
down there, and I shall have to board at the tavern at Tip Top while I
am making inquiries--for I dare not approach the dwelling of Gabriel Le
Noir!" said Marah Rocke, as she folded up her letter and replaced it in
her bosom.

Just at that moment she heard the sound of wheels approach and a
vehicle of some sort draw up to the gate and some one speaking without.

She went to the door, and, listening, heard a girlish voice say:

"A dollar? Yes, certainly; here it is. There, you may go now."

She recognized the voice, and with a cry of joy jerked the door open
just as the carriage rolled away. And the next instant Clara Day was in
her arms.

"Oh, my darling! my darling! my darling! is this really you? Really,
really you, and no dream?" cried Marah Rocke, all in a flutter of
excitement, as she strained Clara to her bosom.

"Yes, it is I, sweet friend, come to stay with you a long time,
perhaps." said Clara, softly, returning her caresses.

"Oh, my lamb! my lamb! what a joyful surprise! I do think I shall go
crazy! Where did you come from, my pet? Who came with you? When did you
start? Did Le Noir consent to your coming? And how did it all happen?
But, dear child, how worn and weary you look! You must be very tired!
Have you had supper? Oh, my darling, come and lie down on this soft
lounge while I put away your things and get you some refreshment," said
Marah Rocke, in a delirium of joy, as she took off Clara's hat and sack
and laid her down to rest on the lounge, which she wheeled up near the
fire.

"Oh, my sweet, we have been so anxious about you! Traverse and myself!
Traverse is still at St. Louis, love, getting on slowly. He has written
to you every week, and so, indeed have I, but we neither of us have had
so much as one letter in reply. And yet neither of us ever doubted your
true heart, my child. We knew that the letters must have been lost,
miscarried or intercepted," said Marah, as she busied herself putting
on the tea-kettle.

"They must, indeed, since my experience in regard to letters exactly
corresponds with yours! I have written every week to both of you, yet
never received one line in reply from either," said Clara.

"We knew it! We said so! Oh, those Le Noirs! Those Le Noirs! But, my
darling, you are perfectly exhausted, and though I have asked you a
half an hundred questions you shall not reply to one of them, nor talk
a bit more until you have rested and had refreshment. Here, my love;
here is Traverse's last letter. It will amuse you to lie and read it
while I am getting tea," said Marah, taking the paper from her bosom
and handing it to Clara, and then placing the stand with the light near
the head of her couch that she might see to read it without rising.

And while Clara, well pleased, perused and smiled over her lover's
letter, Marah Rocke laid the cloth and spread a delicate repast of tea,
milk toast and poached eggs, of which she tenderly pressed her visitor
to partake.

And when Clara was somewhat refreshed by food and rest, she said:

"Now, dear mamma, you will wish to hear how it happens that I am with
you to-night."

"Not unless you feel quite rested, dear girl."

"I am rested sufficiently for the purpose; besides, I am anxious to
tell you. And oh, dear mamma! I could just now sit in your lap and lay
my head upon your kind, soft bosom so willingly!"

"Come, then, Clara! Come, then, my darling," said Marah, tenderly,
holding out her arms.

"No, no, mamma; you are too little; it would be a sin!" said Clara,
smiling; "but I will sit by you and put my hand in yours and rest my
head against your shoulder while I tell you all about it."

"Come, then, my darling!" said Marah Rocke.

Clara took the offered seat, and when she was fixed to her liking she
commenced and related to her friend a full history of all that had
occurred to her at the Hidden House from the moment that she had first
crossed its threshold to the hour in which, through the courage and
address of Capitola, she was delivered from imminent peril.

"And now," said Clara, in conclusion, "I have come hither in order to
get Doctor Williams to make one more appeal for me to the Orphans'
Court. And when it is proved what a traitor my guardian has been to his
trust I have no doubt that the judge will appoint some one else in his
place, or at least see that my father's last wish in regard to my
residence is carried into effect."

"Heaven grant it, my child! Heaven grant it! Oh, those Le Noirs! those
Le Noirs! Were there ever in the world before such ruthless villains
and accomplished hypocrites?" said Marah Rocke, clasping her hands in
the strength of her emotions.

A long time yet they talked together, and then they retired to bed, and
still talked until they fell asleep in each other's arms.

The next morning the widow arose early, gazed a little while with
delight upon the sleeping daughter of her heart, pressed a kiss upon
her cheek so softly as not to disturb her rest, and then, leaving her
still in the deep, sweet sleep of wearied youth, she went down-stairs
to get a nice breakfast.

Luckily a farmer's cart was just passing the road before the cottage on
its way to market.

Marah took out her little purse from her pocket, hailed the driver and
expended half her little store in purchasing two young chickens, some
eggs and some dried peaches, saying to herself:

"Dear Clara always had a good appetite, and healthy young human nature
must live substantially in spite of all its little heart-aches."

While Marah was preparing the chicken for the gridiron the door at the
foot of the stairs opened and Clara came in, looking, after her night's
rest, as fresh as a rosebud.

"What! up with the sun, my darling?" said Marah, going to meet her.

"Yes, mamma! Oh! it is so good to be here with you in this nice, quiet
place, with no one to make me shudder! But you must let me help you,
mamma! See! I will set the table and make the toast!"

"Oh, Miss Clara----"

"Yes, I will! I have been ill used and made miserable, and now you must
pet me, mamma, and let me have my own way and help you to cook our
little meals and to make the house tidy and afterward to work those
buttonholes in the shirts you were spoiling your gentle eyes over last
night. Oh! if they will only let me stay here with you and be at peace,
we shall be very happy together, you and I!" said Clara, as she drew
out the little table and laid the cloth.

"My dear child, may the Lord make you as happy as your sweet affection
would make me!" said Marah.

"We can work for our living together," continued Clara, as she gaily
flitted about from the dresser to the table, placing the cups and
saucers and plates. "You can sew the seams and do the plain hemming,
and I can work the buttonholes and stitch the bosoms, collars and
wristbands! And 'if the worst comes to the worst,' we can hang out our
little shingle before the cottage gate, inscribed with:

           "MRS. ROCKE AND DAUGHTER.
                  Shirt Makers.
    Orders executed with neatness and dispatch.

"We'd drive a thriving business, mamma, I assure you," said Clara, as
she sat down on a low stool at the hearth and began to toast the bread.

"I trust in heaven that it will never come to that with you, my dear!"

"Why? Why, mamma? Why should I not taste of toil and care as well as
others a thousand times better than myself? Why should not I work as
well as you and Traverse, mamma? I stand upon the broad platform of
human rights, and I say I have just as good a right to work as others!"
said Clara, with a pretty assumption of obstinacy, as she placed the
plate of toast upon the board.

"Doubtless, dear Clara, you may play at work just as much as you
please; but heaven forbid you should ever have to work at work!"
replied Mrs. Rocke as she placed the coffee pot and the dish of broiled
chicken on the table.

"Why, mamma, I do not think that is a good prayer at all! That is a
wicked, proud prayer, Mrs. Marah Rocke! Why shouldn't your daughter
really toil as well as other people's daughters, I'd like to be
informed?" said Clara, mockingly, as they both took their seats at the
table.

"I think, dear Clara, that you must have contracted some of your
eccentric little friend Capitola's ways, from putting on her habit! I
never before saw you in such gay spirits!" said Mrs. Rocke, as she
poured out the coffee.

"Oh, mamma; it is but the glad rebound of the freed bird! I am so glad
to have escaped from that dark prison of the Hidden House and to be
here with you. But tell me, mamma, is my old home occupied?"

"No, my dear; no tenant has been found for it. The property is in the
hands of an agent to let, but the house remains quite vacant and
deserted."

"Why is that?" asked Clara.

"Why, my love, for the strangest reason! The foolish country people say
that since the doctor's death the place has been haunted!"

"Haunted!"

"Yes, my dear, so the foolish people say, and they get wiser ones to
believe them."

"What exactly do they say? I hope--I hope they do not trifle with my
dear father's honored name and memory?"

"Oh, no, my darling! no! but they say that although the house is quite
empty and deserted by the living strange sights and sounds are heard
and seen by passers-by at night. Lights appear at the upper windows
from which pale faces look out."

"How very strange!" said Clara.

"Yes, my dear, and these stories have gained such credence that no one
can be found to take the house."

"So much the better, dear mamma, for if the new judge of the Orphans'
Court should give a decision in our favor, as he must, when he hears
the evidence, old and new, you and I can move right into it and need
not then enter the shirt-making line of business!"

"Heaven grant it, my dear! But now, Clara, my love, we must lose no
time in seeing Doctor Williams, lest your guardian should pursue you
here and give you fresh trouble."

Clara assented to this, and they immediately arose from the table,
cleared away the service, put the room in order and went up-stairs to
put on their bonnets, Mrs. Rocke lending Clara her own best bonnet and
shawl. When they were quite ready they locked up the house and set out
for the town.

It was a bright, frosty, invigorating winter's morning, and the two
friends walked rapidly until they reached Doctor Williams' house.

The kind old man was at home, and was much surprised and pleased to see
his visitors. He invited them into his parlor, and when he had heard
their story, he said:

"This is a much more serious affair than the other. We must employ
counsel. Witnesses must be brought from the neighborhood of the Hidden
House. You are aware that the late judge of the Orphans' Court has been
appointed to a high office under the government at Washington. The man
that has taken his place is a person of sound integrity, who will do
his duty. It remains only for us to prove the justice of our cause to
his satisfaction, and all will be well."

"Oh, I trust in heaven that it will be," said Marah, fervently.

"You two must stay in my house until the affair is decided. You might
possibly be safe from real injury; but you could not be free from
molestation in your unprotected condition at the cottage," said Doctor
Williams.

Clara warmly expressed her thanks.

"You had better go home now and pack up what you wish to bring, and put
out the fire and close up the house and come here immediately. In the
mean time I will see your dear father's solicitor and be ready with my
report by the time you get back," said Doctor Williams, promptly taking
his hat to go.

Mrs. Rocke and Clara set out for the cottage, which they soon reached.

Throwing off her bonnet and shawl, Clara said:

"Now, mamma, the very first thing I shall do will be to write to
Traverse, so that we can send the letter by to-day's mail and set his
mind at rest. I shall simply tell him that our mutual letters have
failed to reach their destination, but that I am now on a visit to you,
and that while I remain here nothing can interrupt our correspondence.
I shall not speak of the coming suit until we see how it will end."

Mrs. Rocke approved this plan, and placed writing materials on the
table. And while the matron employed herself in closing up the rooms,
packing up what was needful to take with them to the doctor's and
putting out the fire, Clara wrote and sealed her letter. They then put
on their bonnets, locked up the house, and set out. They called at the
post-office just in time to mail their letter, and they reached the
doctor's house just as he himself walked up to the door, accompanied by
the lawyer. The latter greeted the daughter of his old client and her
friend, and they all went into the house together.

In the doctor's study the whole subject of Clara's flight and its
occasion was talked over, and the lawyer agreed to commence proceedings
immediately.




CHAPTER XII.

CAP "RESTS ON HER LAURELS" AND "SPOILS FOR A FIGHT."

    'Tis hardly in a body's power,
    To keep at times frae being sour,
      To see how things are shared;
    How best o' chiels are whiles in want,
    While coofs on countless thousands rant,
      And ken na how to wear 't.

                          --Burns.


Leaving Clara Day and Marah Rocke in a home of safety, plenty and
kindness, in the old doctor's house, we must run down to Hurricane Hall
to see what mischief Cap has been getting into since we left her! In
truth, none! Cap had had such a surfeit of adventures that she was fain
to lie by and rest upon her laurels. Besides, there seemed just now
nothing to do--no tyrants to take down, no robbers to capture, no
distressed damsels to deliver, and Cap was again in danger of "spoiling
for a fight." And then Herbert Greyson was at the Hall--Herbert Greyson
whom she vowed always did make a Miss Nancy of her! And so Cap had to
content herself for a week with quiet mornings of needlework at her
workstand, with Herbert to read to or talk with her; sober afternoon
rides, attended by Herbert and Old Hurricane; and hum-drum evenings at
the chess board, with the same Herbert, while Major Warfield dozed in a
great "sleepy hollow" of an armchair.

One afternoon when they were out riding through the woods beyond the
Demon's Run, a Sheriff's officer rode up, and bowing to the party,
presented a suspicious-looking document to Capitola and a similar one
to Herbert Greyson. And while Old Hurricane stared his eyes half out,
the parties most interested opened the papers, which they found to be
rather pressing invitations to be present at a certain solemnity at
Staunton. In a word, they were subpoenaed to give testimony in the
case of Williams vs. Le Noir.

"Here's a diabolical dilemma!" said Old Hurricane to himself, as soon
as he learned the purport of these documents.

"Here I shall have to bring Cap into court face to face with that demon
to bear witness against him! Suppose losing one ward, he should lay
claim to another! Ah, but he can't, without foully criminating himself!
Well, well, we shall see!"

While Old Hurricane was cogitating Cap was exulting.

"Oh, won't I tell all I know! Yes, and more, too!" she exclaimed, in
triumph.

"'More, too!' Oh, hoity-toity! Never say more, too!" said Herbert
laughing.

"I will, for I'll tell all I suspect!" said Cap, galloping on ahead, in
her eagerness to get home and pack up for her journey.

The next day Old Hurricane, Herbert Greyson, Capitola, Pitapat and Wool
went by stage to Staunton. They put up at the Planters' and Farmers'
Hotel, whence Herbert Greyson and Capitola soon sallied forth to see
Clara and Mrs. Rocke. They soon found the doctor's house, and were
ushered into the parlor in the presence of their friends.

The meeting between Capitola and Clara and between Mrs. Rocke and
Herbert was very cordial. And then Herbert introduced Capitola to Mrs.
Rocke and Cap presented Herbert to Clara. And they all entered into
conversation upon the subject of the coming lawsuit, and the
circumstances that led to it. And Clara and Capitola related to each
other all that had happened to each after their exchanging clothes and
parting. And when they had laughed over their mutual adventures and
misadventures, Herbert and Capitola took leave and returned to their
hotel.

Herbert Greyson was the most serious of the whole family. Upon reaching
the hotel he went to his own room and fell into deep reflection. And
this was the course of his thought:

"Ira Warfield and Marah Rocke are here in the same town--brought hither
upon the same errand--to-morrow to meet in the same court-room! And yet
not either of them suspects the presence of the other! Mrs. Rocke does
not know that in Capitola's uncle she will behold Major Warfield! He
does not foresee that in Clara's matronly friend he will behold Marah
Rocke! And Le Noir, the cause of all their misery, will be present
also! What will be the effect of this unexpected meeting? Ought I not
to warn one or the other? Let me think--no! For were I to warn Major
Warfield he would absent himself. Should I drop a hint to Marah she
would shrink from the meeting! No, I will leave it all to
Providence--perhaps the sight of her sweet, pale face and soft,
appealing eyes, so full of constancy and truth, may touch that stern
old heart! Heaven grant it may!" concluded Herbert Greyson.

The next day the suit came on.

At an early hour Doctor Williams appeared, having in charge Clara Day,
who was attended by her friend Mrs. Rocke. They were accommodated with
seats immediately in front of the judge.

Very soon afterward Major Warfield, Herbert Greyson and Capitola
entered, and took their places on the witness's bench, at the right
side of the court-room.

Herbert watched Old Hurricane, whose eyes were spellbound to the bench
where sat Mrs. Rocke and Clara. Both were dressed in deep mourning,
with their veils down and their faces toward the judge. But Herbert
dreaded every instant that Marah Rocke should turn her head and meet
that fixed, wistful look of Old Hurricane. And he wondered what strange
instinct it could be that riveted the old man's regards to that
unrecognized woman.

At last, to Herbert's great uneasiness, Major Warfield turned and
commenced questioning him:

"Who is that woman in mourning?"

"Hem--m--that one with the flaxen curls under her bonnet is Miss Day."

"I don't mean the girl, I mean the woman sitting by her?"

"That is--hem--hem--that is Doctor Williams sitting----"

Old Hurricane turned abruptly around and favored his nephew with a
severe, scrutinizing gaze, demanding:

"Herbert, have you been drinking so early in the morning? Demmy, sir,
this is not the season for mint juleps before breakfast! Is that great,
stout, round-bodied, red-faced old Doctor Williams a little woman? I
see him sitting on the right of Miss Day. I didn't refer to him! I
referred to that still, quiet little woman sitting on her left, who has
never stirred hand or foot since she sat down there. Who is she?"

"That woman? Oh, she?--yes--ah, let me see--she is a--Miss Day's
companion!" faltered Herbert.

"To the demon with you! Who does not see that? But who is she? What is
her name?" abruptly demanded Old Hurricane.

"Her name is a--a--did you ever see her before, sir?"

"I don't know! That is what I am trying to remember; but, sir, will you
answer my question?"

"You seem very much interested in her."

"You seem very much determined not to let me know who she is! Hang it,
sir, will you or will you not tell me that woman's name?"

"Certainly," said Herbert. "Her name is----" He was about to say Marah
Rocke, but moral indignation overpowered him and he paused.

"Well, well, her name is what?" impatiently demanded Old Hurricane.

"Mrs. Warfield!" answered Herbert, doggedly.

And just at that unfortunate moment Marah turned her pale face and
beseeching eyes around and met the full gaze of her husband!

In an instant her face blanched to marble and her head sank upon the
railing before her bench. Old Hurricane was too dark to grow pale, but
his bronzed cheek turned as gray as his hair, which fairly lifted
itself on his head. Grasping his walking stick with both his hands, he
tottered to his feet, and, muttering:

"I'll murder you for this, Herbert!" he strode out of the court-room.

Marah's head rested for about a minute on the railing before her and
when she lifted it again her face was as calm and patient as before.

This little incident had passed without attracting attention from any
one except Capitola, who, sitting on the other side of Herbert Greyson,
had heard the little passage of words between him and her uncle, and
had seen the latter start up and go out, and who now, turning to her
companion, inquired:

"What is the meaning of all this, Herbert?"

"It means--Satan! And now attend to what is going on! Mr. Sauter has
stated the case, and now Stringfellow, the attorney for the other side,
is just telling the judge that he stands there in the place of his
client, Lieutenant-Colonel Le Noir, who, being ordered to join General
Taylor in Mexico, is upon the eve of setting out and cannot be here in
person!"

"And is that true? Won't he be here?"

"It seems not. I think he is ashamed to appear after what has happened,
and just takes advantage of a fair excuse to absent himself."

"And is he really going to Mexico?"

"Oh, yes! I saw it officially announced in this morning's papers. And,
by the bye, I am very much afraid he is to take command of our
regiment, and be my superior officer!"

"Oh, Herbert, I hope and pray not! I think there is wickedness enough
packed up in that man's body to sink a squadron or lose an army!"

"Well, Cap, such things will happen. Attention! There's Sauter, ready
to call his witnesses!" And, in truth, the next moment Capitola Black
was called to the stand.

Cap took her place and gave her evidence con amore, and with such vim
and such expressions of indignation, that Stringfellow reminded her she
was there to give testimony, and not to plead the cause.

Cap rejoined that she was perfectly willing to do both! And so she
continued not only to tell the acts, but to express her opinions as to
the motives of Le Noir, and give her judgment as to what should be the
decision of the court.

Stringfellow, the attorney for Colonel Le Noir, evidently thought that
in this rash, reckless, spirited witness he had a fine subject for
sarcastic cross-examination! But he reckoned "without his host." He did
not know Cap! He, too, "caught a Tartar." And before the
cross-examination was concluded, Capitola's apt and cutting replies had
overwhelmed him with ridicule and confusion, and done more for the
cause of her friend than all her partisans put together!

Other witnesses were called to corroborate the testimony of Capitola,
and still others were examined to prove the last expressed wishes of
the late William Day, in regard to the disposal of his daughter's
person during the period of her minority.

There was no effective rebutting evidence, and after some hard arguing
by the attorneys on both sides, the case was closed, and the judge
deferred his decision until the third day thereafter.

The parties then left the court and returned to their several lodgings.

Old Hurricane gave no one a civil word that day. Wool was an atrocious
villain, an incendiary scoundrel, a cut-throat, and a black demon. Cap
was a beggar, a vagabond and a vixen. Herbert Greyson was another
beggar, besides being a knave, a fop and an impudent puppy. The
innkeeper was a swindler, the waiters thieves, the whole world was
going to ruin, where it well deserved to go, and all mankind to the
demon--as he hoped and trusted they would!

And all this tornado of passion and invective arose just because he had
unexpectedly met in the court-room the patient face and beseeching eyes
of a woman, married and forsaken, loved and lost, long ago!

Was it strange that Herbert, who had so resented his treatment of Marah
Rocke, should bear all his fury, injustice and abuse of himself and
others with such compassionate forbearance? But he not only forbore to
resent his own affronts, but also besought Capitola to have patience
with the old man's temper and apologized to the host by saying that
Major Warfield had been very severely tried that day, and when calmer
would be the first to regret the violence of his own words.

Marah Rocke returned with Clara to the old doctor's house. She was more
patient, silent and quiet than before. Her face was a little paler, her
eyes softer, and her tones lower--that was the only visible effect of
the morning's unexpected rencounter.

The next day but one all the parties concerned assembled at the
court-house to hear the decision of the judge. It was given, as had
been anticipated, in favor of Clara Day, who was permitted, in
accordance with her father's approved wishes, to reside in her
patrimonial home under the care of Mrs. Rocke. Colonel Le Noir was to
remain trustee of the property, with directions from the court
immediately to pay the legacies left by the late Doctor Day to Marah
Rocke and Traverse Rocke, and also to pay to Clara Day, in quarterly
instalments, from the revenue of her property, an annual sum of money
sufficient for her support.

This decision filled the hearts of Clara and her friends with joy.
Forgetting time, and place, she threw herself into the arms of Marah
Rocke and wept with delight. All concerned in the trial then sought
their lodgings.

Clara and Mrs. Rocke returned to the cottage to make preparations for
removing to Willow Heights.

Doctor Williams went to the agent of the property to require him to
give up the keys, which he did without hesitation.

Old Hurricane and his party packed up to be ready for the stage to take
them to Tip-Top the next day.

But that night a series of mysterious events were said to have taken
place at the deserted house at Willow Heights that filled the whole
community with superstitious wonder. It was reported by numbers of
gardeners and farmers, who passed that road, on their way to early
market, that a perfect witches' sabbath had been held in that empty
house all night; that lights had appeared, flitting from room to room;
that strange, weird faces had looked out from the windows; and wild
screams had pierced the air!

The next day when this report reached the ears of Clara, and she was
asked by Doctor Williams whether she would not be afraid to live there,
she laughed gaily and bade him try her.

Cap, who had come over to take leave of Clara, joined her in her
merriment, declared that she, for her part, doted on ghosts, and that
after Herbert Greyson's departure she should come and visit Clara and
help her to entertain the specters.

Clara replied that she should hold her to her promise. And so the
friends kissed and separated.

That same day saw several removals.

Clara and Mrs. Rocke took up their abode at Willow Heights and seized
an hour even of that busy time to write to Traverse and apprise him of
their good fortune.

Old Hurricane and his party set out for their home, where they arrived
before nightfall.

And the next day but one Herbert Greyson took leave of his friends and
departed to join his company on their road to glory.




CHAPTER XIII.

BLACK DONALD.

    Feared, shunned, belied ere youth had lost her force,
    He hated men too much to feel remorse,
    And thought the vice of wrath a sacred call,
    To pay the injuries of some on all.

    There was a laughing devil in his sneer,
    That caused emotions both of rage and fear:
    And where his frown of hatred darkly fell,
    Hope, withering fled and mercy sighed farewell!

                          --Byron.


Herbert Greyson had been correct in his conjecture concerning the cause
of Colonel Le Noir's conduct in absenting himself from the trial, or
appearing there only in the person of his attorney. A proud, vain,
conceited man, full of Joseph Surfacisms, he could better have borne to
be arraigned upon the charge of murder than to face the accusation of
baseness that was about to be proved upon him. Being reasonably certain
as to what was likely to be the decision of the Orphans' Court, he was
not disappointed in hearing that judgment had been rendered in favor of
his ward and her friends. His one great disappointment had been upon
discovering the flight of Clara. For when he had ascertained that she
had fled, he knew that all was lost--and lost through Capitola, the
hated girl for whose destruction he had now another and a stronger
motive--revenge!

In this mood of mind three days before his departure to join his
regiment he sought the retreat of the outlaw. He chose an early hour of
the evening as that in which he should be most likely to find Black
Donald.

It was about eight o'clock when he wrapped his large cloak around his
tall figure, pulled his hat low over his sinister brow and set out to
walk alone to the secret cavern in the side of the Demon's Punch Bowl.

The night was dark and the path dangerous; but his directions had been
careful, so that when he reached the brink of that awful abyss he knew
precisely where to begin his descent with the least danger of being
precipitated to the bottom.

And by taking a strong hold upon the stunted saplings of pine and cedar
that grew down through the clefts of the ravine, and placing his feet
firmly upon the points of projecting rocks, he contrived to descend the
inside of that horrible abyss, which from the top seemed to be fraught
with certain death to any one daring enough to make the attempt.

When about half-way down the precipice he reached the clump of cedar
bushes growing in the deep cleft, and concealing the hole that formed
the entrance to the cavern.

Here he paused, and, looking through the entrance into a dark and
apparently fathomless cavern, he gave the peculiar signal whistle,
which was immediately answered from within by the well-known voice of
the outlaw chief, saying:

"All right, my colonel! Give us your hand! Be careful, now, the floor
of this cavern is several feet below the opening."

Le Noir extended his hand into the darkness within and soon felt it
grasped by that of Black Donald, who, muttering:

"Slowly, slowly, my colonel!" succeeded in guiding him down the utter
darkness of the subterranean descent until they stood upon the firm
bottom of the cavern.

They were still in the midst of a blackness that might be felt, except
that from a small opening in the side of the rock a light gleamed.
Toward this second opening Black Donald conducted his patron.

And stooping and passing before him, led him into an inner cavern, well
lighted and rudely fitted up. Upon a large natural platform of rock,
occupying the center of the space, were some dozen bottles of brandy or
whisky, several loaves of bread and some dried venison. Around this
rude table, seated upon fragments of rock, lugged thither for the
purpose, were some eight or ten men of the band, in various stages of
intoxication. Along the walls were piles of bearskins, some of which
served as couches for six or seven men, who had thrown themselves down
upon them in a state of exhaustion or drunken stupor.

"Come, boys, we have not a boundless choice of apartments here, and I
want to talk to my colonel! Suppose you take your liquor and bread and
meat into the outer cavern and give us the use of this one for an
hour," said the outlaw.

The men sullenly obeyed and began to gather up the viands. Demon Dick
seized one of the lights to go after them.

"Put down the glim! Satan singe your skin for you! Do you want to bring
a hue and cry upon us? Don't you know a light in the outer cavern can
be seen from the outside?" roared Black Donald.

Dick sulkily set down the candle and followed his comrades.

"What are you glummering about, confound you! You can see to eat and
drink well enough and find your way to your mouth, in the dark, you
brute!" thundered the captain. But as there was no answer to this and
the men had retreated and left their chief with his visitor alone,
Black Donald turned to Colonel Le Noir and said:

"Well, my patron, what great matter is it that has caused you to leave
the company of fair Clara Day for our grim society?"

"Ah, then, it appears you are not aware that Clara Day has fled from
us--has made a successful appeal to the Orphans' Court, and been taken
out of our hands?" angrily replied Colonel Le Noir.

"Whe-ew! My colonel, I think I could have managed that matter better! I
think if I had had that girl in my power as you had, she should not
have escaped me!"

"Bah! bah! bah! Stop boasting, since it was through your neglect--yours!
yours! that I lost this girl!"

"Mine!" exclaimed Black Donald, in astonishment.

"Aye, yours! for if you had done your duty, performed your engagement,
kept your word, and delivered me from this fatal Capitola, I had not
lost my ward, nor my son his wealthy bride!" exclaimed Le Noir,
angrily.

"Capitola! Capitola again! What on earth had she to do with the loss of
Clara Day?" cried Black Donald, in wonder.

"Everything to do with it, sir! By a cunning artifice she delivered
Clara from our power--actually set her free and covered her flight
until she was in security!"

"That girl again! Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! Ho, ho, ho ho, ho!" laughed and
roared Black Donald, slapping his knees.

Le Noir ground and gnashed his teeth in rage, muttering hoarsely:

"Yes, you may laugh, confound you, since it is granted those who win to
do so! You may laugh; for you have done me out of five thousand
dollars, and what on earth have you performed to earn it?"

"Come, come, my colonel, fair and easy! I don't know which is
vulgarest, to betray loss of temper or love of money, and you are doing
both. However, it is between friends. But how the demon did that girl,
that capital Capitola, get Clara off from right under your eyes?"

"By changing clothes with her, confound you! I will tell you all about
it," replied Le Noir, who thereupon commenced and related the whole
stratagem by which Capitola freed Clara, including the manner in which
she accompanied them to the church and revealed herself at the altar.

Black Donald threw himself back and roared with laughter, vigorously
slapping his knees and crying:

"That girl! that capital Capitola! I would not sell my prospect of
possessing her for double your bribe."

"Your 'prospect!' Your prospect is about as deceptive as a fata
morgana! What have you been doing, I ask you again, toward realizing
this prospect and earning the money you have already received?"

"Fair and easy, my colonel! Don't let temper get the better of justice!
What have I been doing toward earning the money you have already paid
me? In the first place, I lost time and risked my liberty watching
around Hurricane Hall. Then, when I had identified the girl and the
room she slept in by seeing her at the window, I put three of my best
men in jeopardy to capture her. Then, when she, the witch, had captured
them, I sacrificed all my good looks, transmogrifying myself into a
frightful old field preacher, and went to the camp-meeting to watch,
among other things, for an opportunity of carrying her off. The
sorceress! she gave me no such opportunity. I succeeded in nothing
except in fooling the wiseacres and getting admitted to the prison of
my comrades, whom I furnished with instruments by which they made their
escape. Since that time we have had to lie low--yes, literally to lie
low--to keep out of sight, to burrow under ground; in a word, to live
in this cavern."

"And since which you have abandoned all intention of getting the girl
and earning the five thousand dollars," sneered Le Noir.

"Earning the remaining five thousand, you mean, colonel. The first five
thousand I consider I have already earned. It was the last five
thousand that I was to get when the girl should be disposed of."

"Well?"

"Well, I have not given up either the intention of earning the money or
the hope of getting the girl; in truth, I had rather lose the money
than the girl. I have been on the watch almost continually; but, though
I suppose she rides out frequently, I have not yet happened to hit upon
her in any of her excursions. At last, however, I have fixed upon a
plan for getting the witch into my power. I shall trust the execution
of my plan to no one but myself. But I must have time."

"Time! perdition, sir! delay in this matter is fraught with danger!
Listen, sir! How Warfield got possession of this girl or the knowledge
of her history I do not know, except that it was through the agency of
that accursed hag Nancy Grewell. But that he has her and that he knows
all about her is but too certain. That he has not at present legal
proof enough to establish her identity and her rights before a court of
justice I infer from the fact of his continuing inactive in the matter.
But who can foresee how soon he may obtain all the proof that is
necessary to establish Capitola's claims and wrest the whole of this
property from me? Who can tell whether he is not now secretly engaged
in seeking and collecting such proof? Therefore, I repeat that the girl
must immediately be got rid of! Donald, rid me of that creature and the
day that you prove to me her death I will double your fee!"

"Agreed, my colonel, agreed! I have no objection to your doubling, or
even quadrupling, my fee. You shall find me in that, as in all other
matters, perfectly amenable to reason. Only I must have time. Haste
would ruin us. I repeat that I have a plan by which I am certain to get
the girl into my possession--a plan the execution of which I will
entrust to no other hands but my own. But I conclude as I began--I must
have time."

"And how much time?" exclaimed Le Noir, again losing his patience.

"Easy, my patron. That I cannot tell you. It is imprudent to make
promises, especially to you, who will take nothing into consideration
when they cannot be kept," replied Black Donald, coolly.

"But, sir, do you not know that I am ordered to Mexico, and must leave
within three days? I would see the end of this before I go," angrily
exclaimed Le Noir.

"Softly, softly, my child the colonel! 'Slow and sure!' 'Fair and easy
goes far in a day!'"

"In a word, will you do this business for me and do it promptly?"

"Surely, surely, my patron! But I insist upon time."

"But I go to Mexico in three days."

"All honor go with you, my colonel. Who would keep his friend from the
path of glory?"

"Perdition, sir, you trifle with me."

"Perdition, certainly, colonel; there I perfectly agree with you. But
the rest of your sentence is wrong; I don't trifle with you."

"What in the fiend's name do you mean?"

"Nothing in the name of any absent friend of ours. I mean simply that
you may go to--Mexico!"

"And--my business----"

"--Can be done just as well, perhaps better, without you. Recollect, if
you please, my colonel, that when you were absent with Harrison in the
West your great business was done here without you! And done better for
that very reason! No one even suspected your agency in that matter. The
person most benefited by the death of Eugene Le Noir was far enough
from the scene of his murder."

"Hush! Perdition seize you! Why do you speak of things so long past?"
exclaimed Le Noir, growing white to his very lips.

"To jog your worship's memory and suggest that your honor is the last
man who ought to complain of this delay, since it will be very well for
you to be in a distant land serving your country at the time that your
brother's heiress, whose property you illegally hold, is got out of
your way."

"There is something in that," mused Le Noir.

"There is all in that!"

"You have a good brain, Donald."

"What did I tell you? I ought to have been in the cabinet--and mean to
be, too! But, colonel, as I mean to conclude my part of the engagement,
I should like, for fear of accidents, that you conclude yours--and
settle with me before you go."

"What do you mean?"

"That you should fork over to me the remaining five thousand."

"I'll see you at the demon first," passionately exclaimed Le Noir.

"No, you won't, for in that case you'd have to make way with the girl
yourself, or see Old Hurricane make way with all your fortune."

"Wretch that you are!"

"Come, come, colonel, don't let's quarrel. The Kingdom of Satan divided
against itself cannot stand. Do not let us lose time by falling out. I
will get rid of the girl. You, before you go, must hand over the tin,
lest you should fall in battle and your heirs dispute the debt! Shell
out, my colonel! Shell out and never fear! Capitola shall be a wife and
Black Donald a widower before many weeks shall pass."

"I'll do it! I have no time for disputation, as you know, and you
profit by the knowledge. I'll do it, though under protest," muttered Le
Noir, grinding his teeth.

"That's my brave and generous patron!" said Black Donald, as he arose
to attend Le Noir from the cavern; "that's my magnificent colonel of
cavalry! The man who runs such risks for you should be very handsomely
remunerated!"




CHAPTER XIV.

GLORY.

    "What Alexander sighed for,
      What Csar's soul possessed,
    What heroes, saints have died for,
                      Glory!"


Within three days after his settlement with Black Donald, Colonel Le
Noir left home to join his regiment, ordered to Mexico.

He was accompanied by his son Craven Le Noir as far as Baltimore, from
which port the reinforcements were to sail for New Orleans, en route
for the seat of war.

Here, at the last moment, when the vessel was about to weigh anchor,
Craven Le Noir took leave of his father and set out for the Hidden
House.

And here Colonel Le Noir's regiment was joined by the company of new
recruits in which Herbert Greyson held a commission as lieutenant, and
thus the young man's worst forebodings were realized in having for a
traveling companion and superior officer the man of whom he had been
destined to make a mortal enemy, Colonel Le Noir. However, Herbert soon
marked out his course of conduct, which was to avoid Le Noir as much as
was consistent with his own official duty, and, when compelled to meet
him, to deport himself with the cold ceremony of a subordinate to a
superior officer.

Le Noir, on his part, treated Herbert with an arrogant scorn amounting
to insult, and used every opportunity afforded him by his position to
wound and humiliate the young lieutenant.

After a quick and prosperous voyage they reached New Orleans, where
they expected to be farther reinforced by a company of volunteers who
had come down the Mississippi river from St. Louis. These volunteers
were now being daily drilled at their quarters in the city, and were
only waiting the arrival of the vessel to be enrolled in the regiment.

One morning, a few days after the ship reached harbor, Herbert Greyson
went on shore to the military rendezvous to see the new recruits
exercised. While he stood within the enclosure watching their
evolutions under the orders of an officer, his attention became
concentrated upon the form of a young man of the rank and file who was
marching in a line with many others having their backs turned toward
him. That form and gait seemed familiar--the circumstances in which he
saw them again--painfully familiar. And yet he could not identify the
man. While he gazed, the recruits, at the word of command, suddenly
wheeled and faced about. And Herbert could scarcely repress an
exclamation of astonishment and regret.

That young man in the dress of a private soldier was Clara Day's
betrothed, the widow's only son, Traverse Rocke! While Herbert
continued to gaze in surprise and grief, the young recruit raised his
eyes, recognized his friend, flushed up to his very temples and cast
his eyes down again. The rapid evolutions soon wheeled them around, and
the next order sent them into their quarters.

Herbert's time was also up, and he returned to his duty.

The next day Herbert went to the quarters of the new recruits and
sought out his young friend, whom he found loitering about the grounds.
Again Traverse blushed deeply as the young lieutenant approached. But
Herbert Greyson, letting none of his regret appear, since now it would
be worse than useless in only serving to give pain to the young
private, went up to him cordially and shook his hands, saying:

"Going to serve your country, eh, Traverse? Well, I am heartily glad to
see you, at any rate."

"But heartily sorry to see me here, enlisted as a private in a company
of raw recruits, looking not unlike Falstaff's ragged regiment?"

"Nay; I did not say that, Traverse. Many a private in the ranks has
risen to be a general officer," replied Herbert, encouragingly.

Traverse laughed good humoredly, saying:

"It does not look much like that in my case. This dress," he said,
looking down at his coarse, ill-fitting uniform, cowhide shoes, etc.;
"this dress, this drilling, these close quarters, coarse food and mixed
company are enough to take the military ardor out of any one!"

"Traverse, you talk like a petit matre, which is not at all your
character. Effeminacy is not your vice."

"Nor any other species of weakness, do you mean? Ah, Herbert, your
aspiring hopeful, confident old friend is considerably taken down in
his ideas of himself, his success and life in general! I went to the
West with high hopes. Six months of struggling against indifference,
neglect and accumulated debts lowered them down! I carried out letters
and made friends, but their friendship began and ended in wishing me
well. While trying to get into profitable practice I got into debt.
Meanwhile I could not hear from my betrothed in all those months. An
occasional letter from her might have prevented this step. But troubles
gathered around me, debts increased and----"

"--Creditors were cruel. It is the old story; my poor boy!"

"No; my only creditors were my landlady and my laundress, two poor
widows who never willingly distressed me, but who occasionally asked
for 'that little amount' so piteously that my heart bled to lack it to
give them. And as victuals and clean shirts were absolute necessaries
of life, every week my debts increased. I could have faced a prosperous
male creditor, and might, perhaps, have been provoked to bully such an
one, had he been inclined to be cruel; but I could not face poor women
who, after all, I believe, are generally the best friends a struggling
young man can have; and so, not to bore a smart young lieutenant with a
poor private's antecedents----"

"Oh, Traverse----"

"--I will even make an end of my story. 'At last there came a weary day
when hope and faith beneath the weight gave way.' And, hearing that a
company of volunteers was being raised to go to Mexico, I enlisted,
sold my citizen's wardrobe and my little medical library, paid my
debts, made my two friends, the poor widows, some acceptable presents,
sent the small remnant of the money to my mother, telling her that I
was going farther south to try my fortune, and--here I am."

"You did not tell her that you had enlisted?"

"No."

"Oh, Traverse, how long ago was it that you left St. Louis?"

"Just two weeks."

"Ah! if you had only had patience for a few days longer!" burst unaware
from Herbert's bosom. In an instant he was sorry for having spoken
thus, for Traverse, with all his soul in his eyes, asked eagerly:

"Why--why, Herbert? What do you mean?"

"Why, you should know that I did not come direct from West Point, but
from the neighborhood of Staunton and Hurricane Hall."

"Did you? Oh, did you? Then you may be able to give me news of Clara
and my dear mother," exclaimed Traverse, eagerly.

"Yes, I am--pleasant news," said Herbert, hesitating in a manner which
no one ever hesitated before in communicating good tidings.

"Thank heaven! oh, thank heaven! What is it, Herbert? How is my dear
mother getting on? Where is my best Clara?"

"They are both living together at Willow Heights, according to the
wishes of the late Doctor Day. A second appeal to the Orphans' Court
made in behalf of Clara by her next friend, Doctor Williams, about a
month ago, proved more successful. And if you had waited a few days
longer before enlisting and leaving St. Louis, you would have received
a letter from Clara to the same effect, and one from Doctor Williams
apprizing you that your mother had received her legacy, and that the
thousand dollars left you by Doctor Day had been paid into the
Agricultural Bank, subject to your orders."

"Oh, heaven! had I but waited three days longer!" exclaimed Traverse,
in such acute distress that Herbert hastened to console him by saying:

"Do not repine, Traverse; these things go by fate. It was your
destiny--let us hope it will prove a glorious one."

"It was my impatience!" exclaimed Traverse. "It was my impatience!
Doctor Day always faithfully warned me against it; always told me that
most of the errors, sins and miseries of this world arose from simple
impatience, which is want of faith. And now I know it! and now I know
it! What had I, who had an honorable profession, to do with becoming a
private soldier?"

"Well, well, it is honorable at least to serve your country," said
Herbert, soothingly.

"If a foreign foe invaded her shores, yes; but what had I to do with
invading another's country?--enlisting for a war of the rights and
wrongs of which I know no more than anybody else does? Growing
impatient because fortune did not at once empty her cornucopia upon my
head! Oh, fool!"

"You blame yourself too severely, Traverse. Your act was natural enough
and justifiable enough, much as it is to be regretted," said Herbert,
cheerfully.

"Come, come, sit on this plank bench beside me--if you are not ashamed
to be seen with a private who is also a donkey--and tell me all about
it. Show me the full measure of the happiness I have so recklessly
squandered away," exclaimed Traverse, desperately.

"I will sit beside you and tell you everything you wish to know, on
condition that you stop berating yourself in a manner that fills me
with indignation," replied Herbert, as they went to a distant part of
the dusty enclosure and took their seats upon a rude bench.

"Oh, Herbert, bear with me; I could dash my wild, impatient head
against a stone wall!"

"That would not be likely to clear or strengthen your brains," said
Herbert, who thereupon commenced and told Traverse the whole history of
the persecution of Clara Day at the Hidden House; the interception of
her letters; the attempt made to force her into a marriage with Craven
Le Noir; her deliverance from her enemies by the address and courage of
Capitola; her flight to Staunton and refuge with Mrs. Rocke; her appeal
to the court, and finally her success and her settlement under the
charge of her matronly friend at Willow Heights.

Traverse had not listened patiently to this account. He heard it with
many bursts of irrepressible indignation and many involuntary starts of
wild passion. Toward the last he sprang up and walked up and down,
chafing like an angry lion in his cage.

"And this man," he exclaimed, as Herbert concluded; "this demon! this
beast! is now our commanding officer--the colonel of our regiment."

"Yes," replied Herbert, "but as such you must not call him names;
military rules are despotic; and this man, who knows your person and
knows you to be the betrothed of Clara Day, whose hand and fortune he
covets for his son, will leave no power with which his command invests
him untried to ruin and destroy you! Traverse, I say these things to
you that being 'forewarned' you maybe 'forearmed.' I trust that you
will remember your mother and your betrothed, and for their dear sakes
practise every sort of self-control, patience and forbearance under the
provocations you may receive from our colonel. And in advising you to
do this I only counsel that which I shall myself practise. I, too, am
under the ban of Le Noir for the part I played in the church in
succoring Capitola, as well as for happening to be 'the nephew of my
uncle,' Major Warfield, who is his mortal enemy."

"I? Will I not be patient, after the lesson I have just learned upon
the evils of the opposite? Be easy on my account, dear old friend, I
will be as patient as Job, meek as Moses and long-suffering as--my own
sweet mother!" said Traverse, earnestly.

The drum was now heard beating to quarters, and Traverse, wringing his
friend's hand, left him.

Herbert returned to his ship full of one scheme, of which he had not
spoken to Traverse lest it should prove unsuccessful. This scheme was
to procure his free discharge before they should set sail for the Rio
Grande. He had many influential friends among the officers of his
regiment, and he was resolved to tell them as much as was delicate,
proper and useful for them to know of the young recruit's private
history, in order to get their cooperation.

Herbert spent every hour of this day and the next, when off duty, in
this service of his friend. He found his brother officers easily
interested, sympathetic and propitious. They united their efforts with
his own to procure the discharge of the young recruit, but in vain; the
power of Colonel Le Noir was opposed to their influence and the
application was peremptorily refused.

Herbert Greyson did not sit down quietly under this disappointment, but
wrote an application embodying all the facts of the case to the
Secretary of War, got it signed by all the officers of the regiment and
despatched it by the first mail.

Simultaneously he took another important step for the interest of his
friend. Without hinting any particular motive, he had begged Traverse
to let him have his photograph taken, and the latter, with a laugh at
the lover-like proposal, had consented. When the likeness was finished
Herbert sent it by express to Major Warfield, accompanied by a letter
describing the excellent character and unfortunate condition of
Traverse, praying the major's interest in his behalf and concluding by
saying:

"You cannot look upon the accompanying photograph of my friend and any
longer disclaim your own express image in your son."

How this affected the action of Old Hurricane will be seen hereafter.

Traverse, knowing nothing of the efforts that had been and were still
being made for his discharge, suffered neither disappointment for
failure of the first nor anxiety for the issue of the last.

He wrote to his mother and Clara, congratulating them on their good
fortune; telling them that he, in common with many young men of St.
Louis, had volunteered for the Mexican War; that he was then in New
Orleans, en route for the Rio Grande, and that they would be pleased to
know that their mutual friend, Herbert Greyson, was an officer in the
same regiment of which he himself was at present a private, but with
strong hopes of soon winning his epaulettes. He endorsed an order for
his mother to draw the thousand dollars left him by Doctor Day, and he
advised her to re-deposit the sum in her own name for her own use in
case of need. Praying God's blessing upon them all, and begging their
prayers for himself, Traverse concluded his letter, which he mailed the
same evening.

And the next morning the company was ordered on board and the whole
expedition set sail for the Rio Grande.

Now, we might just as easily as not accompany our troops to Mexico and
relate the feats of arms there performed with the minuteness and
fidelity of an eye-witness, since we have sat at dinner-tables where
the heroes of that war have been honored guests, and where we have
heard them fight their battles o'er till "thrice the foe was slain and
thrice the field was won."

We might follow the rising star of our young lieutenant, as by his own
merits and others' mishaps he ascended from rank to rank, through all
the grades of military promotion, but need not because the feats of
Lieutenant--Captain--Major and Colonel Greyson, are they not written in
the chronicles of the Mexican War?

We prefer to look after our little domestic heroine, our brave little
Cap, who, when women have their rights, shall be a lieutenant-colonel
herself. Shall she not, gentlemen?

                     *      *      *      *      *

In one fortnight from this time, while Mrs. Rocke and Clara were still
living comfortably at Willow Heights and waiting anxiously to hear from
Traverse, whom they still supposed to be practising his profession at
St. Louis, they received his last letter written on the eve of his
departure for the seat of war. At first the news overwhelmed them with
grief, but then they sought relief in faith, answered his letter
cheerfully and commended him to the infinite mercy of God.




CHAPTER XV.

CAP CAPTIVATES A CRAVEN.

    "He knew himself a villain, but he deemed
    The rest no better than the thing he seemed;
    And scorned the best as hypocrites who hid
    Those deeds the bolder spirits plainly did.
    He knew himself detested, but he knew
    The hearts that loathed him crouched and--dreaded, too."


The unregenerate human heart is, perhaps, the most inconsistent thing
in all nature; and in nothing is it more capricious than in the
manifestations of its passions; and in no passion is it so fantastic as
in that which it miscalls love, but which is really often only
appetite.

From the earliest days of manhood Craven Le Noir had been the votary of
vice, which he called pleasure. Before reaching the age of twenty-five
he had run the full course of dissipation, and found himself ruined in
health, degraded in character and disgusted with life.

Yet in all this experience his heart had not been once agitated with a
single emotion that deserved the name of passion. It was colder than
the coldest.

He had not loved Clara, though, for the sake of her money, he had
courted her so assiduously. Indeed, for the doctor's orphan girl he had
from the first conceived a strong antipathy. His evil spirit had shrunk
from her pure soul with the loathing a fiend might feel for an angel.
He had found it repugnant and difficult, almost to the extent of
impossibility, for him to pursue the courtship to which he was only
reconciled by a sense of duty to--his pocket.

It was reserved for his meeting with Capitola at the altar of the
Forest Chapel to fire his clammy heart, stagnant blood and sated senses
with the very first passion that he had ever known. Her image, as she
stood there at the altar with flashing eyes and flaming cheeks and
scathing tongue defying him, was ever before his mind's eye. There was
something about that girl so spirited, so piquant and original that she
impressed even his apathetic nature as no other woman had ever been
able to do. But what most of all attracted him to Capitola was her
diablerie. He longed to catch that little savage to his bosom and have
her at his mercy. The aversion she had exhibited toward him only
stimulated his passion.

Craven Le Noir, among his other graces, was gifted with inordinate
vanity. He did not in the least degree despair of over-coming all
Capitola's dislike to his person and inspiring her with a passion equal
to his own.

He knew well that he dared not present himself at Hurricane Hall, but
he resolved to waylay her in her rides and there to press his suit. To
this he was urged by another motive almost as strong as love--namely,
avarice.

He had gathered thus much from his father, that Capitola Black was
supposed to be Capitola Le Noir, the rightful heiress of all that vast
property in land, houses, iron and coal mines, foundries and furnaces,
railway shares, etc., and bank stocks, from which his father drew the
princely revenue that supported them both in their lavish extravagance
of living.

As the heiress--or, rather, the rightful owner--of all this vast
fortune, Capitola was a much greater "catch" than poor Clara, with her
modest estate, had been. And Mr. Craven Le Noir was quite willing to
turn the tables on his father by running off with the great heiress,
and step from his irksome position of dependent upon Colonel Le Noir's
often ungracious bounty to that of the husband of the heiress and the
master of the property. Added to that was another favorable
circumstance--namely, whereas he had had a strong personal antipathy to
Clara he had as strong an attraction to Capitola, which would make his
course of courtship all the pleasanter.

In one word, he resolved to woo, win and elope with, or forcibly
abduct, Capitola Le Noir, marry her and then turn upon his father and
claim the fortune in right of his wife. The absence of Colonel Le Noir
in Mexico favored his projects, as he could not fear interruption.

Meanwhile our little madcap remained quite unconscious of the honors
designed her. She had cried every day of the first week of Herbert's
absence; every alternate day of the second; twice in the third; once in
the fourth; not at all in the fifth, and the sixth week she was quite
herself again, as full of fun and frolic and as ready for any mischief
or deviltry that might turn up.

She resumed her rides, no longer followed by Wool, because Old
Hurricane, partly upon account of his misadventure in having had the
misfortune inadvertently "to lose sight of" his mistress upon that
memorable occasion of the metamorphosis of Cap into Clara and partly
because of the distant absence of Le Noir, did not consider his
favorite in danger.

He little knew that a subtle and unscrupulous agent had been left sworn
to her destruction, and that another individual, almost equally
dangerous, had registered a secret vow to run off with her.

Neither did poor Cap when, rejoicing to be free from the dogging
attendance of Wool, imagine the perils to which she was exposed; nor is
it even likely that if she had she would have cared for them in any
other manner than as promising piquant adventures. From childhood she
had been inured to danger, and had never suffered harm; therefore, Cap,
like the Chevalier Bayard, was "without fear and without reproach."

Craven Le Noir proceeded cautiously with his plans, knowing that there
was time enough and that all might be lost by haste. He did not wish to
alarm Capitola.

The first time he took occasion to meet her in her rides he merely
bowed deeply, even to the flaps of his saddle and, with a melancholy
smile, passed on.

"Miserable wretch! He is a mean fellow to want to marry a girl against
her will, no matter how much he might have been in love with her, and I
am very glad I balked him. Still, he looks so ill and unhappy that I
can't help pitying him," said Cap, looking compassionately at his white
cheeks and languishing eyes, and little knowing that the illness was
the effect of dissipation and that the melancholy was assumed for the
occasion.

A few days after this Cap again met Craven Le Noir, who again, with a
deep bow and sad smile, passed her.

"Poor fellow! he richly deserves to suffer, and I hope it may make him
better, for I am right-down sorry for him; it must be so dreadful to
lose one we love; but it was too base in him to let his father try to
compel her to have him. Suppose, now, Herbert Greyson was to take a
fancy to another girl, would I let uncle go to him and put a pistol to
his head and say, 'Cap is fond of you, you varlet! and demmy, sir, you
shall marry none but her, or receive an ounce of lead in your stupid
brains'? No, I'd scorn it; I'd forward the other wedding; I'd make the
cake and dress the bride and--then maybe I'd break--no, I'm blamed if I
would! I'd not break my heart for anybody. Set them up with it, indeed!
Neither would my dear, darling, sweet, precious Herbert treat me so,
and I'm a wretch to think of it!" said Cap, with a rich, inimitable
unction as, rejoicing in her own happy love, she cheered Gyp and rode
on.

Now, Craven Le Noir had been conscious of the relenting and
compassionate looks of Capitola, but he did not know that they were
only the pitying regards of a noble and victorious nature over a
vanquished and suffering wrong-doer. However, he still determined to be
cautious, and not ruin his prospects by precipitate action, but to
"hasten slowly."

So the next time he met Capitola he raised his eyes with one deep, sad,
appealing gaze to hers, and then, bowing profoundly, passed on.

"Poor man," said Cap to herself, "he bears no malice toward me for
depriving him of his sweetheart; that's certain. And, badly as he
behaved, I suppose it was all for love, for I don't know how any one
could live in the same house with Clara and not be in love with her. I
should have been so myself if I'd been a man, I know!"

The next time Cap met Craven and saw again that deep, sorrowful,
appealing gaze as he bowed and passed her, she glanced after him,
saying to herself:

"Poor soul, I wonder what he means by looking at me in that piteous
manner? I can do nothing to relieve him. I'm sure if I could I would.
But 'the way of the transgressor is hard,' Mr. Le Noir, and he who sins
must suffer."

For about three weeks their seemingly accidental meetings continued in
this silent manner, so slowly did Craven make his advances. Then,
feeling more confidence, he made a considerably long step forward.

One day, when he guessed that Capitola would be out, instead of meeting
her as heretofore, he put himself in her road and, riding slowly toward
a five-barred gate, allowed her to overtake him.

He opened the gate and, bowing, held it open until she had passed.

She bowed her thanks and rode on; but presently, without the least
appearance of intruding, since she had overtaken him, he was at her
side and, speaking with downcast eyes and deferential manner, he said:

"I have long desired an opportunity to express the deep sorrow and
mortification I feel for having been hurried into rudeness toward an
estimable young lady at the Forest Chapel. Miss Black, will you permit
me now to assure you of my profound repentance of that act and to
implore your pardon?"

"Oh, I have nothing against you, Mr. Le Noir. It was not I whom you
were intending to marry against my will; and as for what you said and
did to me, ha! ha! I had provoked it, you know, and I also afterwards
paid it in kind. It was a fair fight, in which I was the victor, and
victors should never be vindictive," said Cap, laughing, for, though
knowing him to have been violent and unjust, she did not suspect him of
being treacherous and deceitful, or imagine the base designs concealed
beneath his plausible manner. Her brave, honest nature could understand
a brute or a despot, but not a traitor.

"Then, like frank enemies who have fought their fight out, yet bear no
malice toward each other, we may shake hands and be friends, I hope,"
said Craven, replying in the same spirit in which she had spoken.

"Well, I don't know about that, Mr. Le Noir. Friendship is a very
sacred thing, and its name should not be lightly taken on our tongues.
I hope you will excuse me if I decline your proffer," said Cap, who had
a well of deep, true, earnest feeling beneath her effervescent surface.

"What! you will not even grant a repentant man your friendship, Miss
Black?" asked Craven, with a sorrowful smile.

"I wish you well, Mr. Le Noir. I wish you a good and, therefore, a
happy life; but I cannot give you friendship, for that means a great
deal."

"Oh, I see how it is! You cannot give your friendship where you cannot
give your esteem. Is it not so?"

"Yes," said Capitola; "that is it; yet I wish you so well that I wish
you might grow worthy of higher esteem than mine."

"You are thinking of my--yes, I will not shrink from characterizing
that conduct as it deserves--my unpardonable violence toward Clara.
Miss Black, I have mourned that sin from the day that I was hurried
into it until this. I have bewailed it from the very bottom of my
heart," said Craven, earnestly, fixing his eyes with an expression of
perfect truthfulness upon those of Capitola.

"I am glad to hear you say so," said Cap.

"Miss Black, please hear this in palliation--I would not presume to say
in defense--of my conduct: I was driven to frenzy by a passion of
contending love and jealousy as violent and maddening as it was unreal
and transient. But that delusive passion has subsided, and among the
unmerited mercies for which I have to be thankful is that, in my
frantic pursuit of Clara Day, I was not cursed with success! For all
the violence into which that frenzy hurried me I have deeply repented.
I can never forgive myself, but--cannot you forgive me?"

"Mr. Le Noir, I have nothing for which to forgive you. I am glad that
you have repented toward Clara and I wish you well, and that is really
all that I can say."

"I have deserved this and I accept it," said Craven, in a tone so
mournful that Capitola, in spite of all her instincts, could not choose
but pity him.

He rode on, with his pale face, downcast eyes and melancholy
expression, until they reached a point at the back of Hurricane Hall,
where their paths diverged.

Here Craven, lifting his hat and bowing profoundly, said, in a sad
tone:

"Good evening, Miss Black," and, turning his horse's head, took the
path leading down into the Hidden Hollow.

"Poor young fellow! he must be very unhappy down in that miserable
place; but I can't help it. I wish he would go to Mexico with the
rest," said Cap, as she pursued her way homeward.

Not to excite her suspicion, Craven Le Noir avoided meeting Capitola
for a few days, and then threw himself in her road and, as before,
allowed her to overtake him.

Very subtly he entered into conversation with her, and, guarding every
word and look, took care to interest without alarming her. He said no
more of friendship, but a great deal of regret for wasted years and
wasted talents in the past and good resolutions for the future.

And Cap listened good humoredly. Capitola, being of a brave, hard, firm
nature, had not the sensitive perceptions, fine intuitions and true
insight into character that distinguished the more refined nature of
Clara Day--or, at least, she had not these delicate faculties in the
same perfection. Thus, her undefined suspicions of Craven's sincerity
were overborne by a sort of noble benevolence which determined her to
think the best of him which circumstances would permit.

Craven, on his part, having had more experience, was much wiser in the
pursuit of his object. He also had the advantage of being in earnest.
His passion for Capitola was sincere, and not, as it had been in the
case of Clara, simulated. He believed, therefore, that, when the time
should be ripe for the declaration of his love, he would have a much
better prospect of success, especially as Capitola, in her ignorance of
her own great fortune, must consider his proposal the very climax of
disinterestedness.

After three more weeks of riding and conversing with Capitola he had,
in his own estimation, advanced so far in her good opinion as to make
it perfectly safe to risk a declaration. And this he determined to do
upon the very first opportunity.

Chance favored him.

One afternoon Capitola, riding through the pleasant woods skirting the
back of the mountain range that sheltered Hurricane Hall, got a fall,
for which she was afterwards inclined to cuff Wool.

It happened in this way: She had come to a steep rise in the road and
urged her pony into a hard gallop, intending as she said to herself, to
"storm the height," when suddenly, under the violent strain, the girth,
ill-fastened, flew apart and Miss Cap was on the ground, buried under
the fallen saddle.

With many a blessing upon the carelessness of grooms, Cap picked
herself up, put the saddle on the horse, and was engaged in drawing
under the girth when Craven Le Noir rode up, sprang from his horse and,
with anxiety depicted on his countenance, ran to the spot inquiring:

"What is the matter? No serious accident, I hope and trust, Miss
Black?"

"No; those wretches in uncle's stables did not half buckle the girth,
and, as I was going in a hard gallop up the steep, it flew apart and
gave me a tumble; that's all," said Cap, desisting a moment from her
occupation to take breath.

"You were not hurt?" inquired Craven, with deep interest in his tone.

"Oh, no; there is no harm done, except to my riding skirt, which has
been torn and muddied by the fall," said Cap, laughing and resuming her
efforts to tighten the girth.

"Pray permit me," said Craven, gently taking the end of the strap from
her hand; "this is no work for a lady, and, besides, is beyond your
strength."

Capitola, thanking him, withdrew to the side of the road, and, seating
herself upon the trunk of a fallen tree, began to brush the dirt from
her habit.

Craven adjusted and secured the saddle with great care, patted and
soothed the pony and then, approaching Capitola in the most deferential
manner, stood before her and said:

"Miss Black, you will pardon me, I hope, if I tell you that the peril
I had imagined you to be in has so agitated my mind as to make it
impossible for me longer to withhold a declaration of my sentiments----"
Here his voice, that had trembled throughout this disclosure, now
really and utterly failed him.

Capitola looked up with surprise and interest; she had never in her
life before heard an explicit declaration of love from anybody. She and
Herbert somehow had always understood each other very well, without
ever a word of technical love-making passing between them; so Capitola
did not exactly know what was coming next.

Craven recovered his voice, and encouraged by the favorable manner in
which she appeared to listen to him, actually threw himself at her feet
and, seizing one of her hands, with much ardor and earnestness and much
more eloquence than any one would have credited him with, poured forth
the history of his passion and his hopes.

"Well, I declare!" said Cap, when he had finished his speech and was
waiting in breathless impatience for her answer; "this is what is
called a declaration of love and a proposal of marriage, is it? It is
downright sentimental, I suppose, if I had only sense enough to
appreciate it! It is as good as a play; pity it is lost upon me!"

"Cruel girl! how you mock me!" cried Craven, rising from his knees and
sitting beside her.

"No, I don't; I'm in solemn earnest. I say it is first rate. Do it
again; I like it!"

"Sarcastic and merciless one, you glory in the pain you give! But if
you wish again to hear me say I love you, I will say it a dozen--yes, a
hundred--times over if you will only admit that you could love me a
little in return."

"Don't; that would be tiresome; two or three times is quite enough.
Besides, what earthly good could my saying 'I love you' do?"

"It might persuade you to become the wife of one who will adore you to
the last hour of his life."

"Meaning you?"

"Meaning me; the most devoted of your admirers."

"That isn't saying much, since I haven't got any but you."

"Thank fortune for it! Then I am to understand, charming Capitola, that
at least your hand and your affections are free," cried Craven,
joyfully.

"Well, now, I don't know about that! Really, I can't positively say;
but it strikes me, if I were to get married to anybody else, there's
somebody would feel queerish!"

"No doubt there are many whose secret hopes would be blasted, for so
charming a girl could not have passed through this world without having
won many hearts who would keenly feel the loss of hope in her marriage.
But what if they do, my enchanting Capitola? You are not responsible
for any one having formed such hopes."

"Fudge!" said Cap, "I'm no belle; never was; never can be; have neither
wealth, beauty nor coquetry enough to make me one. I have no lovers nor
admirers to break their hearts about me, one way or another; but there
is one honest fellow--hem! never mind; I feel as if I belonged to
somebody else; that's all. I am very much obliged to you, Mr. Le Noir,
for your preference, and even for the beautiful way in which you have
expressed it, but--I belong to somebody else."

"Miss Black," said Craven, somewhat abashed but not discouraged. "I
think I understand you. I presume that you refer to the young man who
was your gallant champion in the Forest Chapel."

"The one that made your nose bleed," said the incorrigible Cap.

"Well, Miss Black, from your words it appears that this is by no means
an acknowledged but only an understood engagement, which cannot be
binding upon either party. Now, a young lady of your acknowledged good
sense----"

"I never had any more good sense than I have had admirers," interrupted
Cap.

Craven smiled.

"I would not hear your enemy say that," he replied; then, resuming his
argument, he said:

"You will readily understand, Miss Black, that the vague engagement of
which you speak, where there is want of fortune on both sides, is no
more prudent than it is binding. On the contrary, the position which it
is my pride to offer you is considered an enviable one; even apart from
the devoted love that goes with it. You are aware that I am the sole
heir of the Hidden House estate, which, with all its dependencies, is
considered the largest property, as my wife would be the most important
lady, in the county."

Cap's lip curled a little; looking askance at him she answered:

"I am really very much obliged to you Mr. Le Noir, for the
distinguished honor that you designed for me. I should highly
appreciate the magnanimity of a young gentleman, the heir of the
wealthiest estate in the neighborhood who deigns to propose marriage to
the little beggar that I acknowledge myself to be. I regret to be
obliged to refuse such dignities, but--I belong to another," said
Capitola, rising and advancing toward her horse.

Craven would not risk his success by pushing his suit further at this
sitting.

Very respectfully lending his assistance to put Capitola into her
saddle, he said he hoped at some future and more propitious time to
resume the subject. And then, with a deep bow, he left her, mounted his
horse and rode on his way.

He did not believe that Capitola was more than half in earnest, or that
any girl in Capitola's circumstances would do such a mad thing as to
refuse the position he offered her.

He did not throw himself in her way often enough to excite her
suspicion that their meetings were preconcerted on his part, and even
when he did overtake her or suffer her to overtake him, he avoided
giving her offense by pressing his suit until another good opportunity
should offer. This was not long in coming.

One afternoon he overtook her and rode by her side for a short distance
when, finding her in unusually good spirits and temper, he again
renewed his declaration of love and offer of marriage.

Cap turned around in her saddle and looked at him with astonishment for
a full minute before she exclaimed:

"Why, Mr. Le Noir, I gave you an answer more than a week ago. Didn't I
tell you 'No'? What on earth do you mean by repeating the question?"

"I mean, bewitching Capitola, not to let such a treasure slip out of my
grasp if I can help it."

"I never was in your grasp, that I know of," said Cap, whipping up her
horse and leaving him far behind.

Days passed before Craven thought it prudent again to renew and press
his suit. He did so upon a fine September morning, when he overtook her
riding along the banks of the river. He joined her and in the most
deprecating manner besought her to listen to him once more. Then he
commenced in a strain of the most impassioned eloquence and urged his
love and his proposal.

Capitola stopped her horse, wheeled around and faced him, looking him
full in the eyes while she said:

"Upon my word, Mr. Le Noir, you remind me of an anecdote told of young
Sheridan. When his father advised him to take a wife and settle, he
replied by asking whose wife he should take. Will nobody serve your
purpose but somebody else's sweetheart? I have told you that I belong
to a brave young soldier who is fighting his country's battles in a
foreign land, while you are lazing here at home, trying to undermine
him. I am ashamed of you, sir, and ashamed of myself for talking with
you so many times! Never do you presume to accost me on the highway or
anywhere else again! Craven by name and Craven by nature, you have once
already felt the weight of Herbert's arm! Do not provoke its second
descent upon you! You are warned!" and with that Capitola, with her
lips curled, her eyes flashing and her cheeks burning, put whip to her
pony and galloped away.

Craven Le Noir's thin, white face grew perfectly livid with passion.

"I will have her yet! I have sworn it, and by fair means or by foul I
will have her yet!" he exclaimed, as he relaxed his hold upon his
bridle and let his horse go on slowly, while he sat with his brows
gathered over his thin nose, his long chin buried in his neckcloth and
his nails between his teeth, gnawing like a wild beast, as was his
custom when deeply cogitating.

Presently he conceived a plan so diabolical that none but Satan himself
could have inspired it! This was to take advantage of his acquaintance
and casual meetings with Capitola so to malign her character as to make
it unlikely that any honest man would risk his honor by taking her to
wife; that thus the way might be left clear for himself; and he
resolved, if possible, to effect this in such a manner--namely, by
jests, innuendos and sneers--that it should never be directly traced to
a positive assertion on his part. And in the mean time he determined to
so govern himself in his deportment toward Capitola as to arouse no
suspicion, give no offense and, if possible, win back her confidence.

It is true that even Craven Le Noir, base as he was, shrank from the
idea of smirching the reputation of the woman whom he wished to make a
wife; but then he said to himself that in that remote neighborhood the
scandal would be of little consequence to him, who, as soon as he
should be married, would claim the estate of the Hidden House in right
of his wife, put it in charge of an overseer and then, with his bride,
start for Paris, the paradise of the epicurean, where he designed to
fix their principal residence.

Craven Le Noir was so pleased with his plan that he immediately set
about putting it in execution. Our next chapter will show how he
succeeded.




CHAPTER XVI.

CAP'S RAGE.

    Is he not approved to the height of a villain, who hath slandered,
    scorned, dishonored thy kinswoman. Oh! that I were a man for his
    sake, or had a friend who would be one for mine!

                          --Shakespeare.


Autumn brought the usual city visitors to Hurricane Hall to spend the
sporting season and shoot over Major Warfield's grounds. Old Hurricane
was in his glory, giving dinners and projecting hunts.

Capitola also enjoyed herself rarely, enacting with much satisfaction
to herself and guests her new rle of hostess, and not unfrequently
joining her uncle and his friends in their field sports.

Among the guests there were two who deserve particular attention, not
only because they had been for many years annual visitors of Hurricane
Hall, but more especially because there had grown up between them and
our little madcap heroine a strong mutual confidence and friendship.
Yet no three persons could possibly be more unlike than Capitola and
the two cousins of her soul, as she called these two friends. They were
both distant relatives of Major Warfield, and in right of this
relationship invariably addressed Capitola as "Cousin Cap."

John Stone, the elder of the two, was a very tall, stout, squarely
built young man, with a broad, good-humored face, fair skin, blue eyes
and light hair. In temperament he was rather phlegmatic, quiet and
lazy. In character he was honest, prudent and good-tempered. In
circumstances he was a safe banker, with a notable wife and two healthy
children. The one thing that was able to excite his quiet nerves was
the chase, of which he was as fond as he could possibly be of any
amusement. The one person who agreeably stirred his rather still
spirits was our little Cap, and that was the secret of his friendship
for her.

Edwin Percy, the other, was a young West Indian, tall and delicately
formed, with a clear olive complexion, languishing dark hazel eyes and
dark, bright chestnut hair and beard. In temperament he was ardent as
his clime. In character, indolent, careless and self-indulgent. In
condition he was the bachelor heir of a sugar plantation of a thousand
acres. He loved not the chase, nor any other amusement requiring
exertion. He doted upon swansdown sofas with springs, French plays,
cigars and chocolate. He came to the country to find repose, good air
and an appetite. He was the victim of constitutional ennui that yielded
to nothing but the exhilaration of Capitola's company; that was the
mystery of his love for her, and doubtless the young Creole would have
proposed for Cap, had he not thought it too much trouble to get
married, and dreaded the bustle of a bridal. Certainly Edwin Percy was
as opposite in character to John Stone, as they both were to Capitola,
yet great was the relative attraction among the three. Cap impartially
divided her kind offices as hostess between them.

John Stone joined Old Hurricane in many a hard day's hunt, and Capitola
was often of the party.

Edwin Percy spent many hours on the luxurious lounge in the parlor,
where Cap was careful to place a stand with chocolate, cigars, wax
matches and his favorite books.

One day Cap had had what she called "a row with the governor," that is
to say, a slight misunderstanding with Major Warfield; a very uncommon
occurrence, as the reader knows, in which that temperate old gentleman
had so freely bestowed upon his niece the names of "beggar, foundling,
brat, vagabond and vagrant," that Capitola, in just indignation,
refused to join the birding party, and taking her game bag, powder
flask, shot-horn and fowling piece, and calling her favorite pointer,
walked off, as she termed it, "to shoot herself." But if Capitola's by
no means sweet temper had been tried that morning, it was destined to
be still more severely tested before the day was over.

Her second provocation came in this way: John Stone, another deserter
of the birding party had that day betaken himself to Tip-top upon some
private business of his own. He dined at the Antlers in company with
some sporting gentlemen of the neighborhood, and when the conversation
naturally turned upon field sports, Mr. John Stone spoke of the fine
shooting that was to be had around Hurricane Hall, when one of the
gentlemen, looking straight across the table to Mr. Stone, said:

"Ahem! That pretty little huntress of Hurricane Hall--that niece or
ward, or mysterious daughter of Old Hurricane, who engages with so much
enthusiasm in your field sports over there, is a girl of very free and
easy manners I understand--a Diana in nothing but her love of the
chase!"

"Sir, it is a base calumny! And the man who endorses it is a shameless
slanderer! There is my card! I may be found at my present residence,
Hurricane Hall," said John Stone, throwing his pasteboard across the
table, and rising to leave it.

"Nay, nay," said the stranger, laughing and pushing the card away. "I
do not endorse the statement--I know nothing about it! I wash my hands
of it," said the young man. And then upon Mr. Stone's demanding the
author of the calumny, he gave the name of Mr. Craven Le Noir, who, he
said, had "talked in his cups," at a dinner party recently given by one
of his friends.

"I pronounce--publicly, in the presence of all these witnesses, as I
shall presently to Craven Le Noir himself--that he is a shameless
miscreant, who has basely slandered a noble girl! You, sir, have
declined to endorse those words; henceforth decline to repeat them! For
after this I shall call to a severe account any man who ventures, by
word, gesture or glance to hint this slander, or in any other way deal
lightly with the honorable name and fame of the lady in question.
Gentlemen, I am to be found at Hurricane Hall, and I have the honor of
wishing you a more improving subject of conversation, and--a very good
afternoon," said John Stone, bowing and leaving the room.

He immediately called for his horse and rode home.

In crossing the thicket of woods between the river and the rising
ground in front of Hurricane Hall, he overtook Capitola, who, as we
have said, had been out alone with her gun and dog, and was now
returning home with her game bag well laden.

Now, as John Stone looked at Capitola, with her reckless, free and
joyous air, he thought she was just the sort of girl, unconsciously, to
get herself and friends into trouble. And he thought it best to give
her a hint to put an abrupt period to her acquaintance, if she had even
the slightest, with the heir apparent of the Hidden House.

While still hesitating how to begin the conversation, he came up with
the young girl, dismounted, and, leading his horse, walked by her side,
asking carelessly:

"What have you bagged, Cap?"

"Some partridges! Oh, you should have been out with me and Sweetlips!
We've had such sport! But, anyhow, you shall enjoy your share of the
spoils! Come home and you shall have some of these partridges broiled
for supper, with currant sauce--a dish of my own invention for uncle's
sake, you know! He's such a gourmand!"

"Thank you, yes--I am on my way home now. Hem--m! Capitola, I counsel
you to cut the acquaintance of our neighbor, Craven Le Noir."

"I have already done so; but--what in the world is the matter that you
should advise me thus?" inquired Capitola, fixing her eyes steadily
upon the face of John Stone, who avoided her gaze as he answered:

"The man is not a proper associate for a young woman."

"I know that, and have cut him accordingly; but, Cousin John, there is
some reason for your words, that you have not expressed; and as they
concern me, now I insist upon knowing what they are!"

"Tut! it is nothing!" said the other evasively.

"John Stone, I know better! And the more you look down and whip your
boot the surer I am that there is something I ought to know, and I will
know!"

"Well, you termagant! Have your way! He has been speaking lightly of
you--that's all! Nobody minds him--his tongue is no scandal."

"John Stone--what has he said?" asked Capitola, drawing her breath
hardly between her closed teeth.

"Oh, now, why should you ask? It is nothing--it is not proper that I
should tell you," replied that gentleman, in embarrassment.

"'It is nothing,' and yet 'it is not proper that you should tell me!'
How do you make that out? John Stone, leave off lashing the harmless
bushes and listen to me! I have to live in the same neighborhood with
this man, after you have gone away, and I insist upon knowing the whole
length and breadth of his baseness and malignity, that I may know how
to judge and punish him!" said Capitola, with such grimness of
resolution that Mr. Stone, provoked at her perversity, answered:

"Well, you wilful girl, listen!" And commencing, he mercilessly told
her all that had passed at the table.

To have seen our Cap then! Face, neck and bosom were flushed with the
crimson tide of indignation!

"You are sure of what you tell me, Cousin John?"

"The man vouches for it!"

"He shall bite the dust!"

"What?"

"The slanderer shall bite the dust!"

Without more ado, down was thrown gun, game bag, powder flask and
shot-horn, and, bounding from point to point over all the intervening
space, Capitola rushed into Hurricane Hall, and without an instant's
delay ran straight into the parlor, where her epicurean friend, the
young Creole, lay slumbering upon the lounge.

With her face now livid with concentrated rage, and her eyes glittering
with that suppressed light peculiar to intense passion, she stood
before him and said:

"Edwin! Craven Le Noir has defamed your cousin! Get up and challenge
him!"

"What did you say, Cap?" said Mr. Percy, slightly yawning.

"Must I repeat it? Craven Le Noir has defamed my character--challenge
him!"

"That would be against the law, coz; they would indict me sure!"

"You--you--you lie there and answer me in that way! Oh that I were a
man!"

"Compose yourself, sweet coz, and tell me what all this is about!
Yaw-ooo!--really I was asleep when you first spoke to me!"

"Asleep! Had you been dead and in your grave, the words that I spoke
should have roused you like the trump of the archangel!" exclaimed
Capitola, with the blood rushing back to her cheeks.

"Your entrance was sufficiently startling, coz, but tell me over
again--what was the occasion?"

"That caitiff, Craven Le Noir, has slandered me! Oh, the villain! He is
a base slanderer! Percy, get up this moment and challenge Le Noir! I
cannot breathe freely until it is done!" exclaimed Capitola,
impetuously.

"Cousin Cap, duelling is obsolete; scenes are pass; law settles
everything; and here there is scarcely ground for action for libel. But
be comforted, coz, for if this comes to Uncle Hurricane's ears, he'll
make mince-meat of him in no time. It is all in his line; he'll chaw
him right up!"

"Percy, do you mean to say that you will not call out that man?" asked
Capitola, drawing her breath hardly.

"Yes, coz."

"You won't fight him?"

"No, coz."

"You won't?"

"No."

"Edwin Percy, look me straight in the face!" said Cap, between her
closed teeth.

"Well, I am looking you straight in the face--straight in the two
blazing gray eyes, you little tempest in a teapot--what then?"

"Do I look as though I should be in earnest in what I am about to
speak?"

"I should judge so."

"Then listen, and don't take your eyes off mine until I am done
speaking!"

"Very well, don't be long, though, for it rather agitates me."

"I will not! Hear me, then! You say that you decline to challenge Le
Noir. Very good! I, on my part, here renounce all acquaintance with
you! I will never sit down at the same table--enter the same room, or
breathe the same air with you--never speak to you--listen to you, or
recognize you in any manner, until my deep wrongs are avenged in the
punishment of my slanderer, so help me----"

"Hush-sh! don't swear, Cap--it's profane and unwomanly; and nothing on
earth but broken oaths would be the result!"

But Cap was off! In an instant she was down in the yard, where her
groom was holding her horse, ready in case she wished to take her usual
ride.

"Where is Mr. John Stone?" she asked.

"Down at the kennels, miss," answered the boy.

She jumped into her saddle, put whip to her horse and flew over the
ground between the mansion house and the kennels.

She pulled up before the door of the main building, sprang from her
saddle, threw the bridle to a man in attendance, and rushed into the
house and into the presence of Mr. John Stone, who was busy in
prescribing for an indisposed pointer.

He looked up in astonishment, exclaiming:

"Hilloe! All the witches! Here's Cap! Why, where on earth did you shoot
from? What's up now? You look as if you were in a state of spontaneous
combustion and couldn't stand it another minute."

"And I can't--and I won't! John Stone, you must call that man out!"

"What man, Cap--what the deuce do you mean?"

"You know well enough--you do this to provoke me! I mean the man of
whom you cautioned me this afternoon--the wretch who slandered me--the
niece of your host!"

"Whe--ew!"

"Will you do it?"

"Where's Percy?"

"On the lounge with an ice in one hand and a novel in the other! I
suppose it is no use mincing the matter, John--he is a--mere
epicure--there is no fight in him! It is you who must vindicate your
cousin's honor!"

"My cousin's honor cannot need vindication! It is unquestioned and
unquestionable!"

"No smooth words, if you please, cousin John! Will you, or will you not
fight that man?"

"Tut, Cap, no one really questions your honor--that man will get
himself knocked into a cocked hat if he goes around talking of an
honest girl!"

"A likely thing, when her own cousins and guests take it so quietly."

"What would you have them do, Cap? The longer an affair of this sort is
agitated, the more offensive it becomes! Besides, chivalry is out of
date! The knights-errant are all dead."

"The men are all dead! If any ever really lived!" cried Cap, in a fury.
"Heaven knows I am inclined to believe them to have been a fabulous
race like that of the mastodon or the centaur! I certainly never saw a
creature that deserved the name of man! The very first of your race was
the meanest fellow that ever was heard of--ate the stolen apple and
when found out laid one half of the blame on his wife and the other
on his Maker--'The woman whom thou gavest me' did so and so--pah! I
don't wonder the Lord took a dislike to the race and sent a flood to
sweep them all off the face of the earth! I will give you one more
chance to retrieve your honor--in one word, now--will you fight that
man?"

"My dear little cousin, I would do anything in reason to vindicate the
assailed manhood of my whole sex, but really, now----"

"Will you fight that man? One word--yes, or no?"

"Tut, Cap! you are a very reckless young woman! You--it's your
nature--you are an incorrigible madcap! You bewitch a poor wretch until
he doesn't know his head from his heels--puts his feet into his hat and
covers his scalp with his boots! You are a will-o'-the-wisp who lures a
poor fellow on through woods, bogs and briars, until you land him in
the quicksands! You whirl him around and around until he grows dizzy
and delirious, and talks at random, and then you'd have him called out,
you blood-thirsty little vixen! I tell you, Cousin Cap, if I were to
take up all the quarrels your hoydenism might lead me into, I should
have nothing else to do!"

"Then you won't fight!"

"Can't, little cousin! I have a wife and family, which are powerful
checks upon a man's duelling impulses!"

"Silence! You are no cousin of mine--no drop of your sluggish blood
stagnates in my veins--no spark of the liquid fire of my life's current
burns in your torpid arteries, else at this insult would it set you in
a flame! Never dare to call me cousin again." And so saying, she flung
herself out of the building and into her saddle, put whip to her horse
and galloped away home.

Now, Mr. Stone had privately resolved to thrash Craven Le Noir; but he
did not deem it expedient to take Cap into his confidence. As Capitola
reached the horse-block, her own groom came to take the bridle.

"Jem," she said, as she jumped from her saddle, "put Gyp up and then
come to my room, I have a message to send by you."

And then, with burning cheeks and flashing eyes, she went to her own
sanctum, and after taking off her habit, did the most astounding thing
that ever a woman of the nineteenth or any former century attempted--she
wrote a challenge to Craven Le Noir--charging him with falsehood in
having maligned her honor--demanding from him "the satisfaction of a
gentleman," and requesting him as the challenged party to name the
time, place and weapons with which he would meet her.

By the time she had written, sealed and directed this war-like
defiance, her young groom made his appearance.

"Jem," she asked, "do you know the way to the Hidden House?"

"Yes, miss, sure."

"Then take this note thither, ask for Mr. Le Noir, put it into his
hands, and say that you are directed to wait an answer. And listen! You
need not mention to any one in this house where you are going--nor when
you return, where you have been; but bring the answer you may get
directly to this room, where you will find me."

"Yes, miss," said the boy, who was off like a flying Mercury.

Capitola threw herself into her chair to spend the slow hours until the
boy's return as well as her fierce impatience and forced inaction would
permit.

At tea time she was summoned; but excused herself from going below upon
the plea of indisposition.

"Which is perfectly true," she said to herself, "since I am utterly
indisposed to go. And besides, I have sworn never again to sit at the
same table with my cousins, until for the wrongs done me I have
received ample satisfaction."




CHAPTER XVII.

CAPITOLA CAPS THE CLIMAX.

    Oh! when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd;
    She was a vixen when she went to school;
    And though she is but little she is fierce.

                          --Shakespeare.


It was quite late in the evening when Jem, her messenger, returned.

"Have you an answer?" she impetuously demanded, rising to meet him as
he entered.

"Yes, miss, here it is," replied the boy, handing a neatly folded,
highly perfumed little note.

"Go," said Cap, curtly, as she received it.

And when the boy had bowed and withdrawn, she threw herself into a
chair, and with little respect for the pretty device of the pierced
heart with which the note was sealed, she tore it open and devoured its
contents.

Why did Capitola's cheeks and lips blanch white as death? Why did her
eyes contract and glitter like stilettoes? Why was her breath drawn
hard and laboriously through clenched teeth and livid lips?

That note was couched in the most insulting terms.

Capitola's first impulse was to rend the paper to atoms and grind those
atoms to powder beneath her heel. But a second inspiration changed her
purpose.

"No--no--no! I will not destroy you, precious little note! No legal
document involving the ownership of the largest estate, no cherished
love letter filled with vows of undying affection, shall be more
carefully guarded! Next to my heart shall you lie. My shield and
buckler shall you be! My sure defense and justification! I know what to
do with you, my precious little jewel! You are the warrant for the
punishment of that man, signed by his own hand." And so saying Capitola
carefully deposited the note in her bosom.

Then she lighted her chamber lamp, and, taking it with her, went
down-stairs to her uncle's bedroom.

Taking advantage of the time when she knew he would be absorbed in a
game of chess with John Stone, and she should be safe from interruption
for several hours if she wished, she went to Major Warfield's little
armory in the closet adjoining his room, opened his pistol case and
took from it a pair of revolvers, closed and locked the case, and
withdrew and hid the key that they might not chance to be missed until
she should have time to replace them.

Then she hurried back into her own chamber, locked the pistols up in
her own drawer, and, wearied out with so much excitement, prepared to
go to rest. Here a grave and unexpected obstacle met her; she had
always been accustomed to kneel and offer up to heaven her evening's
tribute of praise and thanksgiving for the mercies of the day, and
prayers for protection and blessing through the night.

Now she knelt as usual, but thanksgiving and prayer seemed frozen on
her lips! How could she praise or pray with such a purpose as she had
in her heart?

For the first time Capitola doubted the perfect righteousness of that
purpose which was of a character to arrest her prayers upon her lips.

With a start of impatience and a heavy sigh, she sprang up and hurried
into bed.

She did not sleep, but lay tossing from side to side in feverish
excitement the whole night--having, in fact, a terrible battle between
her own fierce passions and her newly awakened conscience.

Nevertheless, she arose by daybreak in the morning, dressed herself,
went and unlocked her drawer, took out the pistols, carefully loaded
them, and laid them down for service.

Then she went down-stairs, where the servants were only just beginning
to stir, and sent for her groom, Jem, whom she ordered to saddle her
pony, and also to get a horse for himself, to attend her in a morning
ride.

After which she returned up-stairs, put on her riding habit, and
buckled around her waist a morocco belt, into which she stuck the two
revolvers. She then threw around her shoulders a short circular cape
that concealed the weapons, and put on her hat and gloves and went
below.

She found her little groom already at the door with the horses. She
sprang into her saddle, and, bidding Jem follow her, took the road
toward Tip-Top.

She knew that Mr. Le Noir was in the habit of riding to the village
every morning, and she determined to meet him. She knew, from the early
hour of the day, that he could not possibly be ahead of her, and she
rode on slowly to give him an opportunity to overtake her.

Probably Craven Le Noir was later that morning than usual, for Capitola
had reached the entrance of the village before she heard the sound of
his horse's feet approaching behind her.

She did not wish that their encounter should be in the streets of the
village, so she instantly wheeled her horse and galloped back to meet
him.

As both were riding at full speed, they soon met.

She first drew rein, and, standing in his way, accosted him with:

"Mr. Le Noir!"

"Your most obedient, Miss Black!" he said, with a deep bow.

"I happen to be without father or brother to protect me from affront,
sir, and my uncle is an invalid veteran whom I will not trouble! I am,
therefore, under the novel necessity of fighting my own battles!
Yesterday, sir, I sent you a note demanding satisfaction for a heinous
slander you circulated against me! You replied by an insulting note.
You do not escape punishment so! Here are two pistols; both are loaded;
take either one of them; for, sir, we have met, and now we do not part
until one of us falls from the horse!"

And so saying, she rode up to him and offered him the choice of the
pistols.

He laughed--partly in surprise and partly in admiration, as he said,
with seeming good humor:

"Miss Black, you are a very charming young woman, and delightfully
original and piquant in all your ideas; but you outrage all the laws
that govern the duello. You know that, as the challenged party, I have
the right to the choice of time, place and arms. I made that choice
yesterday. I renew it to-day. When you accede to the terms of the
meeting I shall endeavor to give you all the satisfaction you demand!
Good-morning, miss."

And with a deep bow, even to the flaps of his saddle, he rode past her.

"That base insult again!" cried Capitola, with the blood rushing to her
face.

Then lifting her voice, she again accosted him:

"Mr. Le Noir!"

He turned, with a smile.

She threw one of the pistols on the ground near him, saying:

"Take that up and defend yourself."

He waved his hand in negation, bowed, smiled, and rode on.

"Mr. Le Noir!" she called, in a peremptory tone.

Once more he turned.

She raised her pistol, took deliberate aim at his white forehead, and
fired--

Bang! bang! bang! bang! bang! bang!

Six times without an instant's intermission, until her revolver was
spent.

When the smoke cleared away, a terrible vision met her eyes!

It was Craven Le Noir with his face covered with blood, reeling in his
saddle, from which he soon dropped to the ground.

In falling his foot remained in the hanging stirrup. The well-trained
cavalry horse stood perfectly still, though trembling in a panic of
terror, from which he might at any moment start to run, dragging the
helpless body after him.

Capitola saw this danger, and not being cruel, she tempered justice
with mercy, threw down her spent pistol, dismounted from her horse,
went up to the fallen man, disengaged his foot from the stirrup, and,
taking hold of his shoulders, tried with all her might to drag the
still breathing form from the dusty road where it lay in danger of
being run over by wagons, to the green bank, where it might lie in
comparative safety.

But that heavy form was too much for her single strength. And, calling
her terrified groom to assist her, they removed the body.

Capitola then remounted her horse and galloped rapidly into the
village, and up to the "ladies' entrance" of the hotel, where, after
sending for the proprietor she said:

"I have just been shooting Craven Le Noir for slandering me; he lies by
the roadside at the entrance of the village; you had better send
somebody to pick him up."

"Miss!" cried the astonished inn-keeper.

Capitola distinctly repeated her words and then, leaving the
inn-keeper, transfixed with consternation, she crossed the street and
entered a magistrate's office, where a little, old gentleman, with a
pair of green spectacles resting on his hooked nose, sat at a
writing-table, giving some directions to a constable, who was standing
hat in hand before him.

Capitola waited until this functionary had his orders and a written
paper, and had left the office, and the magistrate was alone, before
she walked up to the desk and stood before him.

"Well, well, young woman! Well, well, what do you want?" inquired the
old gentleman, impatiently looking up from folding his papers.

"I have come to give myself up for shooting Craven Le Noir, who
slandered me," answered Capitola, quietly.

The old man let fall his hands full of papers, raised his head and
stared at her over the tops of his green spectacles.

"What did you say, young woman?" he asked, in the tone of one who
doubted his own ears.

"I say that I have forestalled an arrest by coming here to give myself
up for the shooting of a dastard who slandered, insulted and refused to
give me satisfaction," answered Capitola, very distinctly.

"Am I awake? Do I hear aright? Do you mean to say that you have killed
a man?" asked the dismayed magistrate.

"Oh, I can't say as to the killing! I shot him off his horse and then
sent Mr. Merry and his men to pick him up, while I came here to answer
for myself!"

"Unfortunate girl! And how can you answer for such a dreadful deed?"
exclaimed the utterly confounded magistrate.

"Oh, as to the dreadfulness of the deed, that depends on
circumstances," said Cap, "and I can answer for it very well! He made
addresses to me. I refused him. He slandered me. I challenged him. He
insulted me. I shot him!"

"Miserable young woman, if this be proved true, I shall have to commit
you!"

"Just as you please," said Cap, "but bless your soul, that won't help
Craven Le Noir a single bit!"

As she spoke several persons entered the office in a state of high
excitement--all talking at once, saying:

"That is the girl!"

"Yes, that is her!"

"She is Miss Black, old Warfield's niece."

"Yes, he said she was," etc., etc., etc.

"What is all this, neighbors, what is all this?" inquired the troubled
magistrate, rising in his place.

"Why, sir, there's been a gentleman, Mr. Craven Le Noir, shot. He has
been taken to the Antlers, where he lies in articulus mortis, and we
wish him to be confronted with Miss Capitola Black, the young woman
here present, that he may identify her, whom he accuses of having shot
six charges into him, before his death. She needn't deny it, because he
is ready to swear to her!" said Mr. Merry, who constituted himself
spokesman.

"She accuses herself," said the magistrate, in dismay.

"Then, sir, had she not better be taken at once to the presence of Mr.
Le Noir, who may not have many minutes to live?"

"Yes, come along," said Cap. "I only gave myself up to wait for this;
and as he is already at hand, let's go and have it all over, for I have
been riding about in this frosty morning air for three hours, and I
have got a good appetite, and I want to go home to breakfast."

"I am afraid, young woman, you will scarcely get home to breakfast this
morning," said Mr. Merry.

"We'll see that presently," answered Cap, composedly, as they all left
the office, and crossed the street to the Antlers.

They were conducted by the landlord to a chamber on the first floor,
where upon a bed lay stretched, almost without breath or motion, the
form of Craven Le Noir. His face was still covered with blood, that the
bystanders had scrupulously refused to wash off until the arrival of
the magistrate. His complexion, as far as it could be seen, was very
pale. He was thoroughly prostrated, if not actually dying.

Around his bed were gathered the village doctor, the landlady and
several maid-servants.

"The squire has come, sir; are you able to speak to him?" asked the
landlord, approaching the bed.

"Yes, let him swear me," feebly replied the wounded man, "and then send
for a clergyman."

The landlady immediately left to send for Mr. Goodwin, and the
magistrate approached the head of the bed, and, speaking solemnly,
exhorted the wounded man, as he expected soon to give an account of the
works done in his body, to speak the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, without reserve, malice or exaggeration, both as
to the deed and its provocation.

"I will I will--for I have sent for a minister and I intend to try to
make my peace with heaven," replied Le Noir.

The magistrate then directed Capitola to come and take her stand at the
foot of the bed, where the wounded man, who was lying on his back,
could see her without turning.

Cap came as she was commanded and stood there with some irrepressible
and incomprehensible mischief gleaming out from under her long
eye-lashes and from the corners of her dimpled lips.

The magistrate then administered the oath to Craven Le Noir, and bade
him look upon Capitola and give his evidence.

He did so, and under the terrors of a guilty conscience and of expected
death, his evidence partook more of the nature of a confession than an
accusation. He testified that he had addressed Capitola, and had been
rejected by her; then, under the influence of evil motives, he had
circulated insinuations against her honor, which were utterly
unjustifiable by fact; she, seeming to have heard of them, took the
strange course of challenging him--just as if she had been a man. He
could not, of course, meet a lady in a duel, but he had taken advantage
of the technical phraseology of the challenged party, as to time, place
and weapons, to offer her a deep insult; then she had waylaid him on
the highway, offered him his choice of a pair of revolvers, and told
him that, having met, they should not part until one or the other fell
from the horse; he had again laughingly refused the encounter except
upon the insulting terms he had before proposed. She had then thrown
him one of the pistols, bidding him defend himself. He had laughingly
passed her when she called him by name, he had turned and she
fired--six times in succession, and he fell. He knew no more until he
was brought to his present room. He said in conclusion he did not wish
that the girl should be prosecuted, as she had only avenged her own
honor; and that he hoped his death would be taken by her and her
friends as a sufficient expiation of his offenses against her; and,
lastly, he requested that he might be left alone with the minister.

"Bring that unhappy young woman over to my office, Ketchum," said the
magistrate, addressing himself to a constable. Then turning to the
landlord, he said:

"Sir, it would be a charity in you to put a messenger on horseback and
send him to Hurricane Hall for Major Warfield, who will have to enter
into a recognizance for Miss Black's appearance at court.

"Stop," said Cap, "don't be too certain of that! 'Be always sure you're
right--then go ahead!' Is not any one here cool enough to reflect that
if I had fired six bullets at that man's forehead and every one had
struck, I should have blown his head to the sky? Will not somebody at
once wash his face and see how deep the wounds are?"

The doctor who had been restrained by others now took a sponge and
water and cleaned the face of Le Noir, which was found to be well
peppered with split peas!

Cap looked around, and seeing the astonished looks of the good people,
burst into an irrepressible fit of laughter, saying, as soon as she had
got breath enough:

"Upon my word, neighbors, you look more shocked, if not actually more
disappointed, to find that, after all he is not killed, and there'll be
no spectacle, than you did at first when you thought murder had been
done."

"Will you be good enough to explain this, young woman?" said the
magistrate, severely.

"Certainly, for your worship seems as much disappointed as others!"
said Cap. Then turning toward the group around the bed, she said:

"You have heard Mr. Le Noir's 'last dying speech and confession,' as he
supposed it to be; and you know the maddening provocations that
inflamed my temper against him. Last night, after having received his
insulting answer to my challenge, there was evil in my heart, I do
assure you! I possessed myself of my uncle's revolvers and resolved to
waylay him this morning and force him to give me satisfaction, or if he
refused--well, no matter! I tell you, there was danger in me! But,
before retiring to bed at night, it is my habit to say my prayers; now
the practice of prayer and the purpose of 'red-handed violence,' cannot
exist in the same person at the same time! I wouldn't sleep without
praying, and I couldn't pray without giving up my thoughts of fatal
vengeance upon Craven Le Noir. So at last I made up my mind to spare
his life, and teach him a lesson. The next morning I drew the charges
of the revolvers and reloaded them with poor powder and dried peas!
Everything else has happened just as he has told you! He has received
no harm, except in being terribly frightened, and in having his beauty
spoiled! And as for that, didn't I offer him one of the pistols, and
expose my own face to similar damage? For I'd scorn to take advantage
of any one!" said Cap, laughing.

Craven Le Noir had now raised himself up in a sitting posture, and was
looking around with an expression of countenance which was a strange
blending of relief at this unexpected respite from the grave, and
intense mortification at finding himself in the ridiculous position
which the address of Capitola and his own weak nerves, cowardice and
credulity had placed him.

Cap went up to him and said, in a consoling voice:

"Come, thank heaven that you are not going to die this bout! I'm glad
you repented and told the truth; and I hope you may live long enough to
offer heaven a truer repentance than that which is the mere effect of
fright! For I tell you plainly that if it had not been for the grace of
the Lord, acting upon my heart last night, your soul might have been in
Hades now!"

Craven Le Noir shut his eyes, groaned and fell back overpowered by the
reflection.

"Now, please your worship, may I go home?" asked Cap, demurely, popping
down a mock courtesy to the magistrate.

"Yes--go! go! go! go! go!" said that officer, with an expression as
though he considered our Cap an individual of the animal kingdom whom
neither Buffon nor any other natural philosopher had ever classified,
and who, as a creature of unknown habits, might sometimes be dangerous.

Cap immediately availed herself of the permission, and went out to look
for her servant and horses.

But Jem, the first moment he had found himself unwatched, had put out
as fast as he could fly to Hurricane Hall, to inform Major Warfield of
what had occurred.

And Capitola, after losing a great deal of time in looking for him,
mounted her horse and was just about to start, when who should ride up
in hot haste but Old Hurricane, attended by Wool.

"Stop there!" he shouted, as he saw Cap.

She obeyed, and he sprang from his horse with the agility of youth, and
helped her to descend from hers.

Then drawing her arm within his own, he led her into the parlor, and,
putting an unusual restraint upon himself, he ordered her to tell him
all about the affair.

Cap sat down and gave him the whole history from beginning to end.

Old Hurricane could not sit still to hear. He strode up and down the
room, striking his stick upon the floor, and uttering inarticulate
sounds of rage and defiance.

When Cap had finished her story he suddenly stopped before her, brought
down the point of his stick with a resounding thump upon the floor and
exclaimed:

"Demmy, you New York newsboy! Will you never be a woman? Why the demon
didn't you tell me, sirrah? I would have called the fellow out and
chastised him to your heart's content! Hang it, miss, answer me and
say!"

"Because you are on the invalid list and I am in sound condition and
capable of taking my own part!" said Cap.

"Then, answer me this, while you were taking your own part, why the
foul fiend didn't you pepper him with something sharper than dried
peas?"

"I think he is quite as severely punished in suffering from extreme
terror and intense mortification and public ridicule," said Cap.

"And now, uncle, I have not eaten a single blessed mouthful this
morning, and I am hungry enough to eat up Gyp, or to satisfy Patty."

Old Hurricane, permitting his excitement to subside in a few expiring
grunts, rang the bell and gave orders for breakfast to be served.

And after that meal was over he set out with his niece for Hurricane
Hall.

And upon arriving at home he addressed a letter to Mr. Le Noir, to the
effect that as soon as the latter should have recovered from the effect
of his fright and mortification, he, Major Warfield, should demand and
expect satisfaction.




CHAPTER XVIII.

BLACK DONALD'S LAST ATTEMPT.

    Who can express the horror of that night,
      When darkness lent his robes to monster fear?
    And heaven's black mantle, banishing the light,
      Made everything in fearful form appear.

                          --Brandon.


Let it not be supposed that Black Donald had forgotten his promise to
Colonel Le Noir, or was indifferent to its performance.

But many perilous failures had taught him caution.

He had watched and waylaid Capitola in her rides. But the girl seemed
to bear a charmed safety; for never once had he caught sight of her
except in company with her groom and with Craven Le Noir. And very soon
by eavesdropping on these occasions, he learned the secret design of
the son to forestall the father, and run off with the heiress.

And as Black Donald did not foresee what success Craven Le Noir might
have with Capitola, he felt the more urgent necessity for prompt action
on his own part.

He might, indeed, have brought his men and attacked and overcome
Capitola's attendants, in open day; but the enterprise must needs have
been attended with great bloodshed and loss of life, which would have
made a sensation in the neighborhood that Black Donald, in the present
state of his fortunes, was by no means ambitious of daring.

In a word, had such an act of unparalleled violence been attempted, the
better it succeeded the greater would have been the indignation of the
people, and the whole country would probably have risen and armed
themselves and hunted the outlaws, as so many wild beasts, with horses
and hounds.

Therefore, Black Donald preferred quietly to abduct his victim, so as
to leave no trace of her "taking off," but to allow it to be supposed
that she had eloped.

He resolved to undertake this adventure alone, though to himself
personally this plan was even more dangerous than the other.

He determined to gain access to her chamber, secrete himself anywhere
in the room (except under the bed, where his instincts informed him
that Capitola every night looked), and when the household should be
buried in repose, steal out upon her, overpower, gag and carry her off,
in the silence of the night, leaving no trace of his own presence
behind.

By means of one of his men, who went about unsuspected among the
negroes, buying up mats and baskets, that the latter were in the habit
of making for sale, he learned that Capitola occupied the same remote
chamber, in the oldest part of the house; but that a guest slept in the
room next, and another in the one opposite hers. And that the house was
besides full of visitors from the city, who had come down to spend the
sporting season, and that they were hunting all day and carousing all
night from one week's end to another.

On hearing this, Black Donald quickly comprehended that it was no time
to attempt the abduction of the maiden, with the least probability of
success. All would be risked and most probably lost in the endeavor.

He resolved, therefore, to wait until the house should be clear of
company, and the household fallen into their accustomed carelessness
and monotony.

He had to wait much longer than he had reckoned upon--through October
and through November, when he first heard of and laughed over Cap's
"duel" with Craven Le Noir, and congratulated himself upon the fact
that that rival was no longer to be feared. He had also to wait through
two-thirds of the month of December, because a party had come down to
enjoy a short season of fox-hunting. They went away just before
Christmas.

And then at last came Black Donald's opportunity! And a fine
opportunity it was! Had Satan himself engaged to furnish him with one
to order, it could not have been better!

The reader must know that throughout Virginia the Christmas week, from
the day after Christmas until the day after New-Year, is the negroes'
saturnalia! There are usually eight days of incessant dancing, feasting
and frolicking from quarter to quarter, and from barn to barn. Then the
banjo, the fiddle and the "bones" are heard from morning until night,
and from night until morning.

And nowhere was this annual octave of festivity held more sacred than
at Hurricane Hall. It was the will of Major Warfield that they should
have their full satisfaction out of their seven days' carnival. He
usually gave a dinner party on Christmas day, after which his people
were free until the third of January.

"Demmy, mum!" he would say to Mrs. Condiment, "they wait on us
fifty-one weeks in the year, and it's hard if we can't wait on
ourselves the fifty-second!"

Small thanks to Old Hurricane for his self-denial! He did nothing for
himself or others, and Mrs. Condiment and Capitola had a hot time of it
in serving him. Mrs. Condiment had to do all the cooking and housework.
And Cap had to perform most of the duties of Major Warfield's valet.
And that was the way in which Old Hurricane waited on himself.

It happened, therefore, that about the middle of the Christmas week,
being Wednesday, the twenty-eighth of December, all the house-servants
and farm laborers from Hurricane Hall went off in a body to a banjo
break-down given at a farm five miles across the country.

And Major Warfield, Mrs. Condiment and Capitola were the only living
beings left in the old house that night.

Black Donald, who had been prowling about the premises evening after
evening, watching his opportunity to effect his nefarious object, soon
discovered the outward bound stampede of the negroes, and the
unprotected state in which the old house, for that night only, would be
left. And he determined to take advantage of the circumstance to
consummate his wicked purpose.

In its then defenceless condition he could easily have mustered his
force and carried off his prize without immediate personal risk. But,
as we said before, he eschewed violence, as being likely to provoke
after effects of a too fatal character.

He resolved rather at once to risk his own personal safety in the
quieter plan of abduction which he had formed.

He determined that as soon as it should be dark he would watch his
opportunity to enter the house, steal to Cap's chamber, secrete himself
in a closet, and when all should be quiet, "in the dead waste and
middle of the night," he would come out, master her, stop her mouth and
carry her off.

When it became quite dark he approached the house, and hid himself
under the steps beneath the back door leading from the hall into the
garden, to watch his opportunity of entering. He soon found that his
enterprise required great patience as well as courage. He had to wait
more than two hours before he heard the door unlocked and opened.

He then peered out from his hiding-place and saw old Hurricane taking
his way out towards the garden.

Now was his time to slip unperceived into the house. He stealthily came
out from his hiding-place, crept up the portico stairs to the back
door, noiselessly turned the latch, entered and closed it behind him.
He had just time to open a side door on his right hand and conceal
himself in a wood closet under the stairs, when he heard the footsteps
of Old Hurricane returning.

The old man came in and Black Donald laughed to himself to hear with
what caution he locked, bolted and barred the doors to keep out
house-breakers!

"Ah, old fellow, you are fastening the stable after the horse has been
stolen!" said Black Donald to himself.

As soon as old Hurricane had passed by the closet in which the outlaw
was concealed, and had gone into the parlor, Black Donald determined to
risk the ascent into Capitola's chamber. From the description given by
his men, who had once succeeded in finding their way thither, he knew
very well where to go.

Noiselessly, therefore, he left his place of concealment and crept out
to reconnoitre the hall, which he found deserted.

Old Hurricane's shawl, hat and walking stick were deposited in one
corner. In case of being met on the way, he put the hat on his head,
wrapped the shawl around his shoulders, and took the stick in his hand.

His forethought proved to be serviceable. He went through the hall and
up the first flight of stairs without interruption; but on going along
the hall of the second story he met Mrs. Condiment coming out of Old
Hurricane's room.

"Your slippers are on the hearth, your gown is at the fire and the
kettle is boiling to make your punch, Major Warfield," said the old
lady in passing.

"Umph! umph! umph!" grunted Black Donald in reply.

The housekeeper then bade him good-night, saying that she was going at
once to her room.

"Umph!" assented Black Donald. And so they parted and this peril was
passed.

Black Donald went up the second flight of stairs and then down a back
passage and a narrow staircase and along a corridor and through several
untenanted rooms, and into another passage, and finally through a side
door leading into Capitola's chamber.

Here he looked around for a safe hiding-place--there was a high
bedstead curtained; two deep windows also curtained; two closets, a
dressing bureau, workstand, washstand and two arm chairs. The
forethought of little Pitapat had caused her to kindle a fire on the
hearth and place a waiter of refreshments on the workstand, so as to
make all comfortable before she had left with the other negroes to go
to the banjo break-down.

Among the edibles Pitapat had been careful to leave a small bottle of
brandy, a pitcher of cream, a few eggs and some spice, saying to
herself, "Long as it was Christmas time Miss Caterpillar might want a
sup of egg-nog quiet to herself, jes' as much as old marse did his
whiskey punch"--and never fancying that her young mistress would
require a more delicate lunch than her old master.

Black Donald laughed as he saw this outlay, and remarking that the
young occupant of the chamber must have an appetite of her own, he put
the neck of the brandy bottle to his lips and took what he called "a
heavy swig."

Then vowing that old Hurricane knew what good liquor was, he replaced
the bottle and looked around to find the best place for his
concealment.

He soon determined to hide himself behind the thick folds of the window
curtain, nearest the door, so that immediately after the entrance of
Capitola he could glide to the door, lock it, withdraw the key and have
the girl at once in his power.

He took a second "swig" at the brandy bottle and then went into his
place of concealment to wait events.

That same hour Capitola was her uncle's partner in a prolonged game of
chess. It was near eleven o'clock before Cap, heartily tired of the
battle, permitted herself to be beaten in order to get to bed.

With a satisfied chuckle, Old Hurricane arose from his seat, lighted
two bed-chamber lamps, gave one to Capitola, took the other himself,
and started off for his room, followed by Cap as far as the head of the
first flight of stairs, where she bade him good night.

She waited until she saw him enter his room, heard him lock his door on
the inside and throw himself down heavily into his arm chair, and then
she went on her own way.

She hurried up the second flight of stairs and along the narrow
passages, empty rooms, and steep steps and dreary halls, until she
reached the door of her own dormitory.

She turned the latch and entered the room.

The first thing that met her sight was the waiter of provisions upon
the stand. And at this fresh instance of her little maid's forethought,
she burst into a uncontrollable fit of laughter.

She did not see a dark figure glide from behind the window curtains,
steal to the door, turn the lock and withdraw the key!

But still retaining her prejudice against the presence of food in her
bed-chamber, she lifted up the waiter in both hands to carry it out
into the passage, turned and stood face to face with--Black Donald!




CHAPTER XIX.

THE AWFUL PERIL OF CAPITOLA.

    Out of this nettle, danger,
    I'll pluck the flower, safety!

                          --Shakespeare.


Capitola's blood seemed turned to ice, and her form to stone by the
sight! Her first impulse was to scream and let fall the waiter! She
controlled herself and repressed the scream though she was very near
dropping the waiter.

Black Donald looked at her and laughed aloud at her consternation,
saying with a chuckle:

"You did not expect to see me here to-night, did you now, my dear?"

She gazed at him in a silent panic for a moment.

Then her faculties, that had been suddenly dispersed by the shock, as
suddenly rallied to her rescue.

In one moment she understood her real position.

Black Donald had locked her in with himself and held the key--so she
could not hope to get out.

The loudest scream that she might utter would never reach the distant
chamber of Major Warfield, or the still more remote apartment of Mrs.
Condiment; so she could not hope to bring any one to her assistance.

She was, therefore, entirely in the power of Black Donald. She fully
comprehended this, and said to herself:

"Now, my dear Cap, if you don't look sharp your hour is come! Nothing
on earth will save you, Cap, but your own wits! For if ever I saw
mischief in any one's face, it is in that fellow's that is eating you
up with his great eyes at the same time that he is laughing at you with
his big mouth! Now, Cap, my little man, be a woman! Don't you stick at
trifles! Think of Jael and Sisera! Think of Judith and Holofernes! And
the devil and Doctor Faust, if necessary, and don't you blanch! All
stratagems are fair in love and war--especially in war, and most
especially in such a war as this is likely to be--a contest in close
quarters for dear life!"

All this passed through her mind in one moment, and in the next her
plan was formed.

Setting her waiter down upon the table and throwing herself into one of
the armchairs, she said:

"Well, upon my word! I think a gentleman might let a lady know when he
means to pay her a domiciliary visit at midnight!"

"Upon my word, I think you are very cool!" replied Black Donald,
throwing himself into the second armchair on the other side of the
stand of refreshments.

"People are likely to be cool on a December night, with the thermometer
at zero, and the ground three feet under the snow," said Cap, nothing
daunted.

"Capitola, I admire you! You are a cucumber! That's what you are, a
cucumber!"

"A pickled one?" asked Cap.

"Yes, and as pickled cucumbers are good to give one an appetite, I
think I shall fall to and eat."

"Do so," said Cap, "for heaven forbid that I should fail in hospitality!"

"Why, really, this looks as though you had expected a visitor--doesn't
it?" asked Black Donald, helping himself to a huge slice of ham, and
stretching his feet out toward the fire.

"Well, yes, rather; though, to say the truth, it was not your reverence
I expected," said Cap.

"Ah! somebody else's reverence, eh? Well, let them come! I'll be ready
for them!" said the outlaw, pouring out and quaffing a large glass of
brandy. He drank it, set down the glass, and turning to our little
heroine, inquired:

"Capitola did you ever have Craven Le Noir here to supper with you?"

"You insult me! I scorn to reply!" said Cap.

"Whe-ew! What long whiskers our Grimalkin's got! You scorn to reply!
Then you really are not afraid of me?" asked the robber, rolling a
great piece of cheese in his mouth.

"Afraid of you? No, I guess not!" replied Cap, with a toss of her head.

"Yet, I might do you some harm."

"But, you won't!"

"Why won't I?"

"Because it won't pay!"

"Why wouldn't it?"

"Because you couldn't do me any harm, unless you were to kill me, and
you would gain nothing by my death, except a few trinkets that you may
have without."

"Then, you are really not afraid of me?" he asked, taking another deep
draught of brandy.

"Not a bit of it--I rather like you!"

"Come, now, you're running a rig upon a fellow," said the outlaw,
winking and depositing a huge chunk of bread in his capacious jaws.

"No, indeed! I liked you, long before I ever saw you! I always did like
people that make other people's hair stand on end! Don't you remember
when you first came here disguised as a peddler, though I did not know
who you were, when we were talking of Black Donald, and everybody was
abusing him, except myself? I took his part and said that for my part I
liked Black Donald and wanted to see him."

"Sure enough, my jewel, so you did! And didn't I bravely risk my life
by throwing off my disguise to gratify your laudable wish?"

"So you did, my hero!"

"Ah, but well as you liked me, the moment you thought me in your power
didn't you leap upon my shoulders like a catamount and cling there,
shouting to all the world to come and help you, for you had caught
Black Donald and would die before you would give him up? Ah! you little
vampire, how you thirsted for my blood! And you pretended to like me!"
said Black Donald, eying her from head to foot, with a sly leer.

Cap returned the look with interest. Dropping her head on one side, she
glanced upward from the corner of her eye, with an expression of
"infinite" mischief and roguery, saying:

"Lor, didn't you know why I did that?"

"Because you wanted me captured, I suppose."

"No, indeed, but, because----"

"Well, what?"

"Because I wanted you to carry me off!"

"Well, I declare! I never thought of that!" said the outlaw, dropping
his bread and cheese, and staring at the young girl.

"Well, you might have thought of it then! I was tired of hum-drum life,
and I wanted to see adventures!" said Cap.

Black Donald looked at the mad girl from head to foot and then said,
coolly:

"Miss Black, I am afraid you are not good."

"Yes I am--before folks!" said Cap.

"And so you really wished me to carry you off?"

"I should think so! Didn't I stick to you until you dropped me?"

"Certainly! And now if you really like me as well as you say you do,
come give me a kiss."

"I won't!" said Cap, "until you have done your supper and washed your
face! Your beard is full of crumbs!"

"Very well, I can wait awhile! Meantime just brew me a bowl of egg-nog,
by way of a night-cap, will you?" said the outlaw, drawing off his
boots and stretching his feet to the fire.

"Agreed, but it takes two to make egg-nog; you'll have to whisk up the
whites of the eggs into a froth, while I beat the yellows, and mix the
other ingredients," said Cap.

"Just so," assented the outlaw, standing up and taking off his coat and
flinging it upon the floor.

Cap shuddered, but went on calmly with her preparations. There were two
little white bowls setting one within the other upon the table. Cap
took them apart and set them side by side and began to break the eggs,
letting the whites slip into one bowl and dropping the yellows into the
other.

Black Donald sat down in his shirt sleeves, took one of the bowls from
Capitola and began to whisk up the whites with all his might and main.

Capitola beat up the yellows, gradually mixing the sugar with it. In
the course of her work she complained that the heat of the fire
scorched her face, and she drew her chair farther towards the corner of
the chimney, and pulled the stand after her.

"Oh, you are trying to get away from me," said Black Donald, hitching
his own chair in the same direction, close to the stand, so that he sat
immediately in front of the fireplace.

Cap smiled and went on beating her eggs and sugar together. Then she
stirred in the brandy and poured in the milk and took the bowl from
Black Donald and laid on the foam. Finally, she filled a goblet with
the rich compound and handed it to her uncanny guest.

Black Donald untied his neck cloth, threw it upon the floor and sipped
his egg-nog, all the while looking over the top of the glass at
Capitola.

"Miss Black," he said, "it must be past twelve o'clock."

"I suppose it is," said Cap.

"Then it must be long past your usual hour of retiring."

"Of course it is," said Cap.

"Then what are you waiting for?"

"For my company to go home," replied Cap.

"Meaning me?"

"Meaning you."

"Oh, don't mind me, my dear."

"Very well," said Cap, "I shall not trouble myself about you," and her
tones were steady, though her heart seemed turned into a ball of ice,
through terror.

Black Donald went on slowly sipping his egg-nog, filling up his goblet
when it was empty, and looking at Capitola over the top of his glass.
At last he said:

"I have been watching you, Miss Black."

"Little need to tell me that," said Cap.

"And I have been reading you."

"Well, I hope the page was entertaining."

"Well, yes, my dear, it was, rather so. But why don't you proceed?"

"Proceed--with what?"

"With what you are thinking of, my darling."

"I don't understand you!"

"Why don't you offer to go down-stairs and bring up some lemons?"

"Oh, I'll go in a moment," said Cap, "if you wish."

"Ha--ha--ha--ha--ha! Of course you will, my darling! And you'd deliver me
into the hands of the Philistines, just as you did my poor men when you
fooled them about the victuals! I know your tricks and all your acting
has no other effect on me than to make me admire your wonderful coolness
and courage; so, my dear, stop puzzling your little head with schemes
to baffle me! You are like the caged starling! You can't--get--out!"
chuckled Black Donald, hitching his chair nearer to hers. He was now
right upon the center of the rug.

Capitola turned very pale, but not with fear, though Black Donald
thought she did, and roared with laughter.

"Have you done your supper?" she asked, with a sort of awful calmness.

"Yes my duck," replied the outlaw, pouring the last of the egg-nog into
his goblet, drinking it at a draught and chuckling as he set down the
glass.

Capitola then lifted the stand with the refreshments to remove it to
its usual place.

"What are you going to do, my dear?" asked Black Donald.

"Clear away the things and set the room in order," said Capitola, in
the same awfully calm tone.

"A nice little housewife you'll make, my duck!" said Black Donald.

Capitola set the stand in its corner and then removed her own armchair
to its place before the dressing bureau.

Nothing now remained upon the rug except Black Donald seated in the
armchair!

Capitola paused; her blood seemed freezing in her veins; her heart beat
thickly; her throat was choked; her head full nearly to bursting, and
her eyes were veiled by a blinding film.

"Come--come--my duck--make haste; it is late; haven't you done setting
the room in order yet?" said Black Donald, impatiently.

"In one moment," said Capitola, coming behind his chair and leaning
upon the back of it.

"Donald," she said, with dreadful calmness, "I will not now call you
Black Donald! I will call you as your poor mother did, when your young
soul was as white as your skin, before she ever dreamed her boy would
grow black with crime! I will call you simply Donald, and entreat you
to hear me for a few minutes."

"Talk on, then, but talk fast, and leave my mother alone! Let the dead
rest!" exclaimed the outlaw, with a violent convulsion of his bearded
chin and lip that did not escape the notice of Capitola, who hoped some
good of this betrayal of feeling.

"Donald," she said, "men call you a man of blood; they say that your
hand is red and your soul black with crime!"

"They may say what they like--I care not!" laughed the outlaw.

"But I do not believe all this of you! I believe that there is good in
all, and much good in you; that there is hope for all, and strong hope
for you!"

"Bosh! Stop talking poetry! 'Tain't in my line, nor yours, either!"
laughed Black Donald.

"But truth is in all our lines. Donald, I repeat it, men call you a man
of blood! They say that your hands are red and your soul black with
sin! Black Donald, they call you! But, Donald, you have never yet
stained your soul with a crime as black as that which you think of
perpetrating to-night!"

"It must be one o'clock, and I'm tired," replied the outlaw, with a
yawn.

"All your former acts," continued Capitola, in the same voice of awful
calmness, "have been those of a bold, bad man! This act would be that
of a base one!"

"Take care, girl--no bad names! You are in my power--at my mercy!"

"I know my position, but I must continue. Hitherto you have robbed mail
coaches and broken into rich men's houses. In doing thus you have
always boldly risked your life, often at such fearful odds that men
have trembled at their firesides to hear of it. And even women, while
deploring your crimes, have admired your courage."

"I thank 'em kindly for it! Women always like men with a spice of the
devil in them!" laughed the outlaw.

"No, they do not!" said Capitola, gravely. "They like men of strength,
courage and spirit--but those qualities do not come from the Evil One,
but from the Lord, who is the giver of all good. Your Creator, Donald,
gave you the strength, courage and spirit that all men and women so
much admire; but He did not give you these great powers that you might
use them in the service of his enemy, the devil!"

"I declare there is really something in that! I never thought of that
before."

"Nor ever thought, perhaps, that however misguided you may have been,
there is really something great and good in yourself that might yet be
used for the good of man and the glory of God!" said Capitola,
solemnly.

"Ha, ha, ha! Oh, you flatterer! Come, have you done? I tell you it is
after one o'clock, and I am tired to death!"

"Donald, in all your former acts of lawlessness your antagonists were
strong men; and as you boldly risked your life in your depredations,
your acts, though bad, were not base! But now your antagonist is a
feeble girl, who has been unfortunate from her very birth; to destroy
her would be an act of baseness to which you never yet descended."

"Bosh! Who talks of destruction? I am tired of all this nonsense! I
mean to carry you off and there's an end of it!" said the outlaw,
doggedly, rising from his seat.

"Stop!" said Capitola, turning ashen pale. "Stop--sit down and hear me
for just five minutes--I will not tax your patience longer."

The robber, with a loud laugh, sank again into his chair, saying:

"Very well, talk on for just five minutes, and not a single second
longer; but if you think in that time to persuade me to leave this room
to-night without you, you are widely out of your reckoning, my duck,
that's all."

"Donald, do not sink your soul to perdition by a crime that heaven
cannot pardon! Listen to me! I have jewels here worth several thousand
dollars! If you will consent to go I will give them all to you and let
you quietly out of the front door and never say one word to mortal of
what has passed here to-night."

"Ha, ha, ha! Why, my dear, how green you must think me! What hinders me
from possessing myself of your jewels, as well as of yourself!" said
Black Donald, impatiently rising.

"Sit still! The five minutes' grace are not half out yet," said
Capitola, in a breathless voice.

"So they are not! I will keep my promise," replied Black Donald,
laughing, and again dropping into his seat.

"Donald, Uncle pays me a quarterly sum for pocket money, which is at
least five times as much as I can spend in this quiet country place. It
has been accumulating for years until now I have several thousand
dollars all of my own. You shall have it if you will only go quietly
away and leave me in peace!" prayed Capitola.

"My dear, I intend to take that anyhow--take it as your bridal dower,
you know! For I'm going to carry you off and make an honest wife of
you!"

"Donald, give up this heinous purpose!" cried Capitola, in an agony of
supplication, as she leaned over the back of the outlaw's chair.

"Yes, you know I will--ha--ha--ha!" laughed the robber.

"Man, for your own sake give it up!"

"Ha, ha, ha! for my sake!"

"Yes, for yours! Black Donald, have you ever reflected on death?" asked
Capitola, in a low and terrible voice.

"I have risked it often enough; but as to reflecting upon it--it will
be time enough to do that when it comes! I am a powerful man, in the
prime and pride of life," said the athlete, stretching himself
exultingly.

"Yet it might come--death might come with sudden overwhelming power,
and hurl you to destruction! What a terrible thing for this magnificent
frame of yours, this glorious handiwork of the Creator, to be hurled to
swift destruction, and for the soul that animates it to be cast into
hell!"

"Bosh again! That is a subject for the pulpit, not for a pretty girl's
room. If you really think me such a handsome man, why don't you go with
me at once and say no more about it," roared the outlaw laughing.

"Black Donald--will you leave my room?" cried Capitola, in an agony of
prayer.

"No!" answered the outlaw, mocking her tone.

"Is there no inducement that I can hold out to you to leave me?"

"None!"

Capitola raised herself from her leaning posture, took a step backward,
so that she stood entirely free from the trap-door, then slipping her
foot under the rug, she placed it lightly on the spring-bolt, which she
was careful not to press; the ample fall of her dress concealed the
position of her foot.

Capitola was now paler than a corpse, for hers was the pallor of a
living horror! Her heart beat violently, her head throbbed, her voice
was broken as she said:

"Man, I will give you one more chance! Oh, man, pity yourself as I pity
you, and consent to leave me!"

"Ha, ha, ha! It is quite likely that I will! Isn't it, now? No, my
duck, I haven't watched and planned for this chance for this long time
past to give it up, now that you are in my power! A likely story
indeed! And now the five minutes' grace are quite up!"

"Stop! Don't move yet! Before you stir, say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!"
said Capitola, solemnly.

"Ha, ha, ha! That's a pretty idea! Why should I say that?"

"Say it to please me! Only say it, Black Donald!"

"But why to please you?"

"Because I wish not to kill both your body and soul--because I would
not send you prayerless into the presence of your Creator! For, Black
Donald, within a few seconds your body will be hurled to swift
destruction, and your soul will stand before the bar of God!" said
Capitola, with her foot upon the spring of the concealed trap.

She had scarcely ceased speaking before he bounded to his feet, whirled
around and confronted her, like a lion at bay, roaring forth:

"You have a revolver there, girl--move a finger and I shall throw
myself upon you like an avalanche?"

"I have no revolver--watch my hands as I take them forth, and see!"
said Capitola, stretching her arms out toward him.

"What do you mean, then, by your talk of sudden destruction?" inquired
Black Donald, in a voice of thunder.

"I mean that it hangs over you--that it is imminent! That it is not to
be escaped! Oh, man, call on God, for you have not a minute to live!"

The outlaw gazed on her in astonishment.

Well he might, for there she stood paler than marble--sterner than
fate--with no look of human feeling about her, but the gleaming light
of her terrible eyes, and the beading sweat upon her death-like brow.

For an instant the outlaw gazed on her in consternation, and then,
recovering himself he burst into a loud laugh, exclaiming:

"Ha, ha, ha! Well, I suppose this is what people would call a piece of
splendid acting! Do you expect to frighten me, my dear, as you did
Craven Le Noir, with the peas!"

"Say 'Lord have mercy on my soul'--say it. Black Donald--say it. I
beseech you!" she prayed.

"Ha, ha, ha, my dear! You may say it for me! And to reward you, I will
give you, such a kiss! It will put life into those marble cheeks of
yours!" he laughed.

"I will say it for you! May the Lord pity and save Black Donald's soul,
if that be yet possible, for the Saviour's sake!" prayed Capitola, in a
broken voice, with her foot upon the concealed and fatal spring.

He laughed aloud, stretched forth his arms and rushed to clasp her.

She pressed the spring.

The drop fell with a tremendous crash!

The outlaw shot downwards--there was an instant's vision of a white and
panic-stricken face, and wild, uplifted hands as he disappeared, and
then a square, black opening, was all that remained where the terrible
intruder had sat.

No sight or sound came up from that horrible pit, to hint of the
secrets of the prison house.

One shuddering glance at the awful void and then Capitola turned and
threw herself, face downward, upon the bed, not daring to rejoice in
the safety that had been purchased by such a dreadful deed, feeling
that it was an awful, though a complete victory!




CHAPTER XX.

THE NEXT MORNING.

                Oh, such a day!
    So fought, so followed and so fairly won
    Came not till now to dignify the times.
              Since Csar's fortunes.

                          --Shakespeare.


Capitola lay upon the bed, with her face buried in the pillow, the
greater portion of the time from two o'clock until day. An
uncontrollable horror prevented her from turning lest she should see
the yawning mystery in the middle of the floor, or hear some awful
sound from its unknown depths. The very shadows on the walls thrown up
wildly by the expiring firelight were objects of grotesque terror.
Never--never--in her whole youth of strange vicissitude, had the nerves
of this brave girl been so tremendously shaken and prostrated.

It was late in the morning when at last nature succumbed, and she sank
into a deep sleep. She had not slept long when she was aroused from a
profound state of insensibility by a loud, impatient knocking at her
door.

She started up wildly and gazed around her. For a minute she could not
remember what were the circumstances under which she had laid down, or
what was that vague feeling of horror and alarm that possessed her.
Then the yawning trap-door, the remnants of the supper, and Black
Donald's coat, hat and boots upon the floor, drove in upon her reeling
brain the memory of the night of terror!

The knocking continued more loudly and impatiently, accompanied by the
voice of Mrs. Condiment, crying:

"Miss Capitola--Miss Capitola--why, what can be the matter with her?
Miss Capitola!"

"Eh? What? Yes!" answered Capitola, pressing her hands to her feverish
forehead, and putting back her dishevelled hair.

"Why, how soundly you sleep, my dear! I've been calling and rapping
here for a quarter of an hour! Good gracious, child what made you
oversleep yourself so?"

"I--did not get to bed till very late," said Capitola, confusedly.

"Well, well, my dear, make haste now, your uncle is none of the
patientest, and he has been waiting breakfast for some time! Come, open
the door and I will help you to dress, so that you may be ready
sooner."

Capitola rose from the side of the bed, where she had been sitting, and
went cautiously around that gaping trap door to her chamber door, when
she missed the key, and suddenly remembered that it had been in Black
Donald's pocket when he fell. A shudder thrilled her frame at the
thought of that horrible fall.

"Well--well--Miss Capitola, why don't you open the door?" cried the old
lady, impatiently.

"Mrs. Condiment, I have lost the key--dropped it down the trap-door.
Please ask uncle to send for some one to take the lock off--and don't
wait breakfast for me."

"Well, I do think that was very careless, my dear; but I'll go at
once," said the old lady, moving away.

She had not been gone more than ten minutes, when Old Hurricane was
heard, coming blustering along the hall and calling:

"What now, you imp of Satan? What mischief have you been at now?
Opening the trap-door, you mischievous monkey! I wish from the bottom
of my soul you had fallen into it, and I should have got rid of one
trial! Losing your key, you careless baggage! I've a great mind to
leave you locked up there forever."

Thus scolding, Old Hurricane reached the spot and began to ply
screw-drivers and chisels until at length the strong lock yielded, and
he opened the door.

There a vision met his eyes that arrested his steps upon the very
threshold; the remains of a bacchanalian supper; a man's coat and hat
and boots upon the floor; in the midst of the room the great, square,
black opening; and beyond it standing upon the hearth, the form of
Capitola, with disordered dress, dishevelled hair and wild aspect!

"Oh, uncle, see what I have been obliged to do!" she exclaimed,
extending both her arms down toward the opening with a look of blended
horror and inspiration, such as might have sat upon the countenance of
some sacrificial priestess of the olden time.

"What--what--what!" cried the old man, nearly dumb with amazement.

"Black Donald was in my room last night. He stole from his concealment
and locked the door on the inside and withdrew the key, thus locking me
in with himself, and----" She ceased and struck both hands to her face,
shuddering from head to foot.

"Go on, girl!" thundered Old Hurricane, in an agony of anxiety.

"I escaped harmless--oh, I did, sir--but at what a fearful price!"

"Explain! Explain!" cried Old Hurricane, in breathless agitation.

"I drew him to sit upon the chair on the rug, and"--again she shuddered
from head to foot, "and I sprang the trap and precipitated him to--oh,
heaven of heavens!--where? I know not!"

"But you--you were unharmed?"

"Yes--yes!"

"Oh, Cap! Oh, my dear Cap! Thank heaven for that!"

"But, uncle, where--oh, where did he go?" inquired Capitola, almost
wildly.

"Who the demon cares? To perdition. I hope and trust, with all my heart
and soul!" cried Old Hurricane, with emphasis, as he approached and
looked down the opening.

"Uncle, what is below there?" asked Capitola anxiously, pointing down
the abyss.

"An old cellar, as I have told you long ago, and Black Donald, as you
have just told me. Hilloe there! Are you killed, as you deserve to be,
you atrocious villain?" roared Old Hurricane, stooping down into the
opening.

A feeble distant moan answered him.

"Oh, heaven! He is living! He is living! I have not killed him!" cried
Capitola, clasping her hands.

"Why, I do believe you are glad of it!" exclaimed Old Hurricane, in
astonishment.

"Oh, yes, yes, yes! For it was a fearful thought that I had been
compelled to take a sacred life! to send an immortal soul unprepared to
its account!"

"Well! his neck isn't broken, it appears, or he couldn't groan; but I
hope and trust every other bone in his body is! Mrs. Condiment, mum!
I'll trouble you to put on your bonnet and walk to Ezy's and tell him
to come here directly! I must send for the constable," said Old
Hurricane, going to the door and speaking to his housekeeper, who, with
an appalled countenance had been a silent spectator of all that had
passed.

As soon as the old woman had gone to do her errand he turned again, and
stooping down the hole, exclaimed:

"I say, you scoundrel down there! What do you think of yourself now?
Are you much hurt, you knave? Is every one of your bones broken, as
they deserve to be, you villain? Answer me, you varlet!"

A low, deep moan was the only response.

"If that means yes, I'm glad to hear it, you wretch. You'll go to the
camp-meeting with us again, won't you, you knave? You'll preach against
evil passions and profane swearing, looking right straight at me all
the time, until you bring the eyes of the whole congregation upon me as
a sinner above all sinners, you scoundrel? You'll turn me out of my own
bed and away from my own board, won't you, you villain? Won't you,
precious Father Grey? Oh, we'll Father Grey you! Demmy, the next time a
trap-door falls under you, you rascal, there shall be a rope around
your neck to keep you from the ground, precious Father Grey!"

"Uncle! Uncle! that is cowardly!" exclaimed Capitola.

"What is cowardly, Miss Impertinence?"

"To insult and abuse a fallen man who is in your power! The poor man is
badly hurt, may be dying, for aught you know, and you stand over him
and berate him when he cannot even answer you!"

"Umph, umph, umph; demmy, you're--umph, well, he is fallen, fallen
pretty badly, eh? and if he should come round after this, the next fall
he gets will be likely to break his neck, eh?--I say, you gentleman
below there--Mr. Black Donald--precious Father Grey--you'll keep quiet,
won't you, while we go and get our breakfast? do, now! Come, Cap, come
down and pour out my coffee, and by the time we get through, Old Ezy
will be here."

Capitola complied, and they left the room together.

The overseer came in while they were at breakfast, and with his hair
standing on end, listened to the account of the capture of the outlaw
by our heroine.

"And now saddle Fleetfoot and ride for your life to Tip-Top and bring a
pair of constables," were the last orders of Old Hurricane.

While Mr. Ezy was gone on his errand, Major Warfield, Capitola and Mrs.
Condiment remained below stairs.

It was several hours before the messenger returned with the constables,
and with several neighbors whom interest and curiosity had instigated
to join the party.

As soon as they arrived, a long ladder was procured and carried up into
Capitola's chamber, and let down through the trap-door. Fortunately it
was long enough, for when the foot of the ladder found the floor of the
cellar, the head rested securely against the edge of the opening.

In a moment the two constables began singly to descend, the foremost
one carrying a lighted candle in his hand.

The remaining members of the party, consisting of Major Warfield,
Capitola, Mrs. Condiment, and some half dozen neighbors, remained
gathered around the open trap-door, waiting, watching, and listening
for what might next happen.

Presently one of the constables called out:

"Major Warfield, sir!"

"Well!" replied Old Hurricane.

"He's a-breathing still, sir; but seems badly hurt, and may be a-dying,
seeing as he's unsensible and unspeakable. What shall we do long of
him?"

"Bring him up! let's have a look at the fellow, at any rate!" exclaimed
Old Hurricane, peremptorily.

"Just so, sir! but some of the gem-men up there'll have to come down on
the ladder and give a lift. He's a dead weight now, I tell your honor!"

Several of the neighbors immediately volunteered for the service, and
two of the strongest descended the ladder to lend their aid.

On attempting to move the injured man he uttered a cry of pain, and
fainted, and then it took the united strength and skill of four strong
men to raise the huge insensible form of the athlete, and get him up
the ladder. No doubt the motion greatly inflamed his inward wounds, but
that could not be helped. They got him up at last, and laid out upon
the floor a ghastly, bleeding, insensible form, around which every one
gathered to gaze. While they were all looking upon him as upon a
slaughtered wild beast, Capitola alone felt compassion.

"Uncle, he is quite crushed by his fall. Make the men lay him upon the
bed. Never think of me; I shall never occupy this room again; its
associations are too full of horrors. There, uncle, make them at once
lay him upon the bed."

"I think the young lady is right, unless we mean to let the fellow
die," said one of the neighbors.

"Very well! I have particular reasons of my own for wishing that the
man's life should be spared until he could be brought to trial and
induced to give up his accomplices," said Old Hurricane. Then, turning
to his ward, he said:

"Come along, Capitola. Mrs. Condiment will see that your effects are
transferred to another apartment.

"And you, friends," he continued, addressing the men present, "be so
good, so soon as we have gone, to undress that fellow and put him to
bed, and examine his injuries while I send off for a physician; for I
consider it very important his life should be spared sufficiently long
to enable him to give up his accomplices." And so saying, Old Hurricane
drew the arm of Capitola within his own and left the room.

It was noon before the physician arrived. When he had examined the
patient he pronounced him utterly unfit to be removed, as besides other
serious contusions and bruises, his legs were broken and several of his
ribs fractured.

In a word. It was several weeks before the strong constitution of the
outlaw prevailed over his many injuries, and he was pronounced well
enough to be taken before a magistrate and committed to prison to await
his trial. Alas! his life, it was said, was forfeit by a hundred
crimes, and there could be no doubt as to his fate. He maintained a
self-possessed good-humored and laughingly defiant manner, and when
asked to give up his accomplices, he answered gaily:

That treachery was a legal virtue which outlaws could not be expected
to know anything about.

Capitola was everywhere lauded for her brave part in the capture of the
famous desperado. But Cap was too sincerely sorry for Black Donald to
care for the applause.




CHAPTER XXI.

A FATAL HATRED.

    "Oh, heaven and all its hosts, he shall not die!"
    "By Satan and his fiends, he shall not live!
    This is no transient flash of fugitive passion,
    His death has been my life for years of misery,
    Which, else I had not lived,
    Upon that thought, and not on food, I fed,
    Upon that thought, and not on sleep, I rested,
    I came to do the deed that must be done,
    Nor thou, nor the sheltering angels could prevent me."

                          --Maturin.


The United States army, under General Scott, invested the city of
Mexico.

A succession of splendid victories had marked every stage of their
advance, from the seacoast to the capital. Vera Cruz had fallen;
Cerro-Gordo had been stormed and passed; Xalapa taken; the glorious
triumph of Churubusco had been achieved. The names of Scott, Worth,
Wool, Quitman, Pillow and others were crowned with honor. Others again,
whose humble names and unnoticed heroism have never been recorded,
endured as nobly, suffered as patiently, and fought as bravely. Our own
young hero, Herbert Greyson, had covered himself with honor.

The War with Mexico witnessed, perhaps, the most rapid promotions of
any other in the whole history of military affairs.

The rapid ascent of our young officer was a striking instance of this.
In two years from the time he had entered the service, with a lieutenant's
commission, he held the rank of major, in the ---- Regiment of Infantry.

Fortune had not smiled upon our other young friend, Traverse
Rocke--partly because, being entirely out of his vocation, he had no
right to expect success; but mostly because he had a powerful enemy in
the Colonel of his regiment--an unsleeping enemy, whose constant
vigilance was directed to prevent the advancement and insure the
degradation and ruin of one whom he contemptuously termed the
"gentleman private."

Now, it is known that by the rules of military etiquette, a wide social
gulf lies between the Colonel of the regiment and the private in the
ranks.

Yet, Colonel Le Noir continually went out of his way to insult Private
Rocke, hoping to provoke him to some act of fatal insubordination.

And very heavy was this trial to a high spirited young man like
Traverse Rocke, and very fortunate was it for him that he had early
been imbued with that most important truth, that "He who ruleth his own
spirit is greater than he who taketh a city."

But, if Colonel Le Noir crossed the gulf of military etiquette to
harass the poor young soldier, Major Greyson did the same thing for the
more honorable purpose of soothing and encouraging him.

And both Herbert and Traverse hoped that the designs of their Colonel
would be still frustrated by the self-command and patience of the young
private.

Alas! they did not know the great power of evil! They did not know that
nothing less than Divine Providence could meet and overcome it.

They fondly believed that the malignity of Le Noir had resulted in no
other practical evil than in preventing the young soldier's
well-merited advancement, and in keeping him in the humble position of
a private in the ranks.

They were not aware that the discharge of Traverse Rocke had long ago
arrived, but that it had been suppressed through the diabolical cunning
of Le Noir. That letters, messages and packets, sent by his friends to
the young soldier, had found their way into his Colonel's possession
and no further.

And so, believing the hatred of that bad man to have been fruitless of
serious, practical evil, Herbert encouraged his friend to be patient
for a short time longer, when they should see the end of the campaign,
if not of the war.

It was now that period of suspense and of false truce between the
glorious 20th of August and the equally glorious 8th of September,
1847--between the two most brilliant actions of the war, the battle of
Churubusco and the storming of Chapultepec.

The General-in-Chief of the United States forces in Mexico was at his
headquarters in the Archiepiscopal palace of Tacubaya, on the suburbs,
or in the full sight of the city of the Montezumas, awaiting the issue
of the conference between the commissioners of the hostile governments,
met to arrange the terms of a treaty of peace--that every day grew more
hopeless.

General Scott, who had had misgivings as to the good faith of the
Mexicans, had now his suspicions confirmed by several breaches on the
part of the enemy of the terms of the armistice.

Early in September he despatched a letter to General Santa Anna,
complaining of these infractions of the truce, and warning him that if
some satisfactory explanations were not made within forty-eight hours
he should consider the armistice at an end, and renew hostilities.

And not to lose time, he began on the same night a series of
reconnaissances, the object of which was to ascertain their best
approach to the city of Mexico, which, in the event of the renewal of
the war, he purposed to carry by assault.

It is not my intention to pretend to describe the siege and capture of
the capital, which has been so often and eloquently described by grave
and wise historians, but rather to follow the fortunes of an humble
private in the ranks, and relate the events of a certain court-martial,
as I learned them from the after-dinner talk of a gallant officer who
had officiated on the occasion.

It was during these early days in September, while the illustrious
General-in-Chief was meditating concluding the war by the assault of
the city of Mexico, that Colonel Le Noir also resolved to bring his own
private feud to an end, and ruin his enemy by a coup-de-diable.

He had an efficient tool for his purpose in the Captain of the company
to which Traverse Rocke belonged. This man, Captain Zuten, was a vulgar
upstart thrown into his command by the turbulence of war, as the scum
is cast up to the surface by the boiling of the cauldron.

He hated Traverse Rocke, for no conceivable reason, unless it was that
the young private was a perfect contrast to himself, in the possession
of a handsome person, a well cultivated mind, and a gentlemanly
deportment--cause sufficient for the antagonism of a mean and vulgar
nature.

Colonel Le Noir was not slow to see and to take advantage of this
hatred.

And Captain Zuten became the willing coadjutor and instrument of his
vengeance. Between them they concocted a plot to bring the unfortunate
young man to an ignominious death.

One morning, about the first of September, Major Greyson, in going his
rounds, came upon Traverse, standing sentry near one of the outposts.
The aspect of the young private was so pale, haggard and despairing
that his friend immediately stopped and exclaimed:

"Why Traverse, how ill you look! More fitted for the sick list than the
sentry's duties. What the deuce is the matter?"

The young soldier touched his hat to his superior and answered sadly,
"I am ill, ill in body and mind, sir."

"Pooh!--leave off etiquette when we are alone, Traverse, and call me
Herbert, as usual. Heaven knows, I shall be glad when all this is over
and we fall back into our relative civil positions towards each other.
But what is the matter now, Traverse? Some of Le Noir's villainy again,
of course."

"Of course. But I did not mean to complain, Herbert; that were
childish. I must endure this slavery, these insults and persecutions
patiently, since I have brought them upon myself."

"Take comfort, Traverse. The war is drawing to a close. Either this
armistice will end in a permanent peace, or when hostilities are
renewed our General will carry the city of Mexico by storm, and dictate
the terms of a treaty from the grand square of the capital. In either
event the war will soon be over, the troops disbanded, and the
volunteers free to go about their business, and Doctor Traverse Rocke
at liberty to pursue his legitimate profession," said Herbert,
cheerfully.

"It may be so, I do not know. Oh, Herbert, whether it be from want of
sleep and excessive fatigue--for I have been on duty for three days and
nights--or whether it be from incipient illness, or all these causes
put together, I cannot tell, but my spirits are dreadfully depressed!
There seems to be hanging over me a cloud of fate I cannot dispel.
Every hour seems descending lower and blacker over my head, until it
feels like some heavy weight about to suffocate or crush me," said
Traverse, sadly.

"Pooh, pooh! hypochondria! cheer up! Remember that in a month we shall
probably be disbanded, and in a year--think of it, Traverse
Rocke--Clara Day will be twenty-one, and at liberty to give you her
hand. Cheer up!"

"Ah, Herbert, all that seems now to be more unsubstantial than the
fabric of a dream. I cannot think of Clara or of my mother without
despair. For oh, Herbert, between me and them there seems to yawn a
dishonored grave! Herbert, they talk, you know, of an attack upon the
Molina-del-Rey, and I almost hope to fall in that charge!"

"Why?" inquired Major Greyson, in dismay.

"To escape being forced into a dishonored grave! Herbert, that man has
sworn my ruin, and he will accomplish it!" said Traverse, solemnly.

"For Heaven's sake, explain yourself!" said Herbert.

"I will. Listen! I will tell you the history of the last three days,"
said Traverse; but before he could add another word the sentry that was
to relieve his guard approached and said:

"Captain Zuten orders you to come to his tent instantly."

With a glance of significance, Traverse bowed to Herbert and walked
off, while the sentinel took his place.

Herbert saw no more of Traverse that day. At night he went to inquire
for him, but learned that he had been sent with a reconnoitering party
to the Molina-del-Rey.

The next day, on seeking Traverse, he understood that the young private
had been despatched on a foraging expedition. That night, upon again
inquiring for him, he was told that he had been sent in attendance upon
the officers who had borne secret despatches to General Quitman, at his
quarters on the Acapulco road.

"Traverse is right. They mean to ruin him. I see how it is, exactly.
When I saw Traverse on guard, two days ago, he looked like a man
exhausted and crazed for want of sleep, and since that time he has been
night and day engaged in harassing duty. That demon, Le Noir, with
Zuten to help him, has determined to keep Traverse from sleep, until
nature is thoroughly exhausted, and then set him upon guard, that he
may be found sleeping on his post. That was what the boy meant when he
talked of the cloud that was hanging over him, and of being forced into
a dishonored grave, and when he hoped, poor fellow, to fall in the
approaching assault upon the Molina-del-Rey! I see it all now. They
have decided upon the destruction of Traverse. He can do nothing, A
soldier's whole duty is comprised in one word--obedience, even if, as
in this instance, he is ordered to commit suicide. Let them hatch their
diabolical plots. We will see if the Lord does not still reign, and the
devil is not a fool. It shall go hard, but that they are 'hoist with
their own petard!'" said Herbert, indignantly.

Early the next morning he went to the tent of Captain Zuten and
requested to see Private Traverse Rocke, in whom, he said, he felt a
warm interest.

The answer of Colonel Le Noir's tool confirmed Herbert's worse
suspicions.

Touching his cap with an air of exaggerated deference, he said:

"As you think so much of the young fellow, Major, I am very sorry to
inform you, sir, that he is under arrest."

"Upon what charge?" inquired Herbert, calmly, concealing the suspicion
and indignation of his bosom.

"Upon a rather bad one, Major--sleeping on his post," replied the
officer, masking his exultation with a show of respect.

"Rather bad! The penalty is death," said Herbert, dryly.

"Yes, sir--martial law is rather severe."

"Who charges him?" asked Herbert, curtly.

"The Colonel of our regiment, sir," replied the man, scarcely able to
conceal his triumph.

"An accusation from a high quarter. Is his charge supported by other
testimony?"

"Beg pardon, Major, but is that necessary?"

"You have answered my question by asking another one, sir. I will
trouble you for a direct reply," said Herbert with dignity.

"Then, Major, I must reply--yes."

"What testimony? I would know the circumstances?"

"Well, sir, I will tell you about it," said the officer, with
ill-concealed triumph. "Private Traverse Rocke had the early morning
watch----"

"After his return from the night ride to Acapulco?"

"Yes, sir. Well, Colonel Le Noir and myself in going our rounds this
morning, just before sunrise, came full upon the young fellow, fast
asleep on his post. In fact, sir, it required a hearty shake to awaken
him."

"After ninety-six hours' loss of sleep, I should not wonder."

"I know nothing about that, sir. I only know that Colonel Le Noir and
myself found him fast asleep on his post. He was immediately arrested."

"Where is he now?" inquired Herbert.

"In one of the Colonel's extra tents, under guard," replied the
officer.

Herbert immediately went to the tent in question, where he found two
sentinels, with loaded muskets, on duty before the door. They grounded
arms on the approach of their superior officer.

"Is Private Traverse Rocke confined within there?" he inquired.

"Yes, sir."

"I must pass in to see him."

"I beg your pardon, sir, but our orders are strict, not even to admit
an officer, without a written order from our Colonel, said the
sentinel.

"Where is the Colonel?"

"In his tent, sir."

Herbert immediately went on to the fine marquee occupied by Colonel Le
Noir.

The sentinel on duty there at once admitted him, and he passed on into
the presence of the Colonel.

He saluted his superior officer with cold military etiquette, and said:

"I have come, sir, to ask of you an order to see Private Traverse
Rocke, confined under the charge of sleeping on his post."

"I regret to say, Major Greyson, that it cannot be done," replied Le
Noir, with ironical politeness.

"Will you have the kindness to inform me, sir, upon what pretext my
reasonable request is refused?" asked Herbert, coldly.

"I deem it quite unnecessary to do so, sir," answered the Colonel,
haughtily.

"Then I have no more to do here," replied Herbert, leaving the tent.

He immediately threw himself into his saddle and rode off to the
Archiepiscopal palace of Tacubaya, where the General-in-Chief had fixed
his headquarters.

Here he had to wait some little time before he was admitted to the
presence of the gallant commander, who received him with all the
stately courtesy for which that renowned officer is distinguished.

Herbert mentioned the business that had brought him to the General's
presence, the request of a written order to see a prisoner in strict
confinement for sleeping on his post.

The commander whose kind heart was interested in the welfare of all his
soldiers, made some inquiries into the affair, of which Herbert
proceeded to give him a short history, without, however, venturing, as
yet, directly to charge the Captain or the Colonel with intentional
foul play; indeed to have attempted to criminate the superior officers
of the accused man would then have been most unwise, useless and
hurtful.

The General immediately wrote the desired order and passed it to the
young officer.

Herbert bowed and was about to retire from the room, when he was called
back by the General, who placed a packet of letters in his hand, saying
that they had arrived among his despatches, and were for the prisoner,
to whom Major Greyson might as well take them at once.

Herbert received them with avidity, and on his way back to the
Colonel's tent he examined their superscription.

There were three letters--all directed to Traverse Rocke. On two of
them he recognized the familiar handwriting of Marah Rocke, on the
other he saw the delicate Italian style of a young lady's hand, which
he readily believed to be that of Clara.

In the midst of his anxiety on his friend's account he rejoiced to have
this one little ray of comfort to carry him. He knew that many months
had elapsed since the young soldier had heard from his friends at
home--in fact, Traverse never received a letter unless it happened to
come under cover to Herbert Greyson. And well they both knew the
reason.

"How very fortunate," said Herbert, as he rode on, "that I happened to
be at the General's quarters to receive these letters just when I did;
for if they had been sent to Colonel Le Noir's quarters or to Captain
Z.'s, poor Traverse would never have heard of them. However, I shall
not distract Traverse's attention by showing him these letters until he
has told me the full history of his arrest, for I wish him to give me a
cool account of the whole thing, so that I may know if I can possibly
serve him. Ah, it is very unlikely that any power of mine will be able
to save him if indeed, and in truth, he did sleep upon his post,"
ruminated Herbert, as he rode up to the tent where the prisoner was
confined.

Another pair of sentinels were on duty in place of those who had
refused him admittance.

He alighted from his horse, was challenged, showed his order, and
passed into the tent.

There a sight met him that caused the tears to rush to his eyes--for
the bravest is always the tenderest heart.

Thrown down on the mat at the back of the tent lay Traverse Rocke,
pale, haggard and sunken in the deep, deep sleep of utter exhaustion.
Even in that state of perfect abandonment, prostration and
insensibility, the expression of great mental anguish remained upon his
deathly countenance; a mortal pallor overspread his face; his thick,
black curls, matted with perspiration, clung to his hollow temples and
cheeks; great drops of sweat beaded upon his corrugated brow; a quiver
convulsed his mouth and chin; every circumstance betrayed how severely,
even in that swoon-like state, he suffered.

Herbert drew a camp-stool and sat down beside his mat, resolving not to
break that greatly needed rest, but to wait patiently until the sleeper
should awake.

Again, I say that I know nothing about mesmerism, but I have seen
strange effects produced quite unconsciously by the presence of one
person upon another. And in a few minutes after Herbert took his seat
beside Traverse, it was noticeable that the face of the sleeper lost
its look of pain, and his rest grew deep and calm.

Herbert sat watching that pale, calm, intellectual face, thanking
heaven that his mother, in her distant home, knew nothing of her boy's
deadly peril and praying heaven that its justice might be vindicated in
the deliverance of this victim from the snares of those who sought his
life.

For more than an hour longer Traverse slept the deep sleep of
exhaustion, and then calmly awoke. On seeing Herbert sitting beside
him, he smiled sadly, saying:

"You here, Herbert? How kind of you to come. Well, Herbert, you see
they have succeeded, as I knew they would. That was what I wished to
tell you about when I was abruptly ordered away. I do believe it was
done on purpose to prevent my telling you. I really think I have been
surrounded by spies to report and distort every word and look and
gesture. If our company had only watched the enemy with half the
vigilance with which they watched me, that party of emigrants would not
have been cut off on the plains."

"Traverse," said Herbert, solemnly taking the hand of his friend, "were
you caught sleeping on your post?"

"Ah, sleeping like death, Herbert."

Herbert dropped the hand of his friend, covered his face with his own,
and groaned aloud, "He could not help it!"

"I told you that they had resolved upon my death, Herbert. I told you
that I should be pushed into a shameful grave!"

"Oh, no, no, the Lord forbid! But tell me all about it, Traverse, that
I may understand and know how to proceed," said Herbert, in a broken
voice.

"Well, I need not tell you how I have been insulted, oppressed and
persecuted by those two men, for you know that already."

"Yes, yes!"

"It really soon became apparent to me that they were resolved, if
possible, to exasperate me to desert, to retort, or to commit some
other fatal act of insubordination or violence. Yet, for the sake of my
dear mother and of Clara, I did violence only to my own natural
manhood, and bore it all with the servility of a slave."

"With the submission of a saint, dear Traverse; and in doing so you
followed the divine precept and example of Our Saviour, who, when
accused, railed upon and buffeted, 'opened not his mouth.' And in His
forbearance, dear Traverse, there was as much of God-like dignity as
there was of saintly patience. Great self-respect is as often
manifested in forbearance as in resentment," said Herbert, soothingly.

"But you see it availed me nothing. Here I am, under a charge to which
I plead guilty, and the penalty of which is--death!" replied Traverse,
in despair.

"Tell me how it was, Traverse. Your persecutions and your patience I
knew before, but what are the circumstances that led to your present
position? That your misfortune is the result of a concerted plan on the
part of Le Noir and his tool, I partly see, but I wish you to put me in
possession of all the facts, that I may see in what manner I may be
able to assist you."

"Ah, Herbert, I thank you, most faithful of friends, but I doubt
whether you can assist me in any other manner than in being kind to my
poor mother and my dear Clara when I am gone--for ah, old playmate, the
act can be too surely proved upon me, and the penalty is certain--and
it is death!" said the poor boy, deeply sighing.

Herbert groaned, and said:

"But tell me, at least, the history of the four days preceding your
arrest."

"I will. Let me see--this is Friday. Well, until this morning's fatal
sleep, I had not slept since Sunday night. Monday was passed in the
usual routine of military duty. Monday evening I was sent on a
reconnoitering expedition to the old castellated Spanish fort of the
Casa de Mata, that occupied the whole night. On Tuesday morning I was
selected to attend the messenger who went with the flag of truce into
the city to carry our General's letter of expostulation to Santa Anna,
which employed the whole day. On Tuesday night, without having had an
hour's rest in the interval, I was put on guard. Wednesday morning I
was sent with a party to escort an emigrant caravan across the marsh to
the village of Churubusco. Wednesday afternoon you saw me on guard and
I told you that I had not slept one hour for three days and nights."

"Yes, you looked ill enough to be ordered on the sick list."

"Yet, listen. Thoroughly exhausted as I was, on Wednesday night I was
ordered to join a party to go on a secret reconnoitering expedition to
the Molina-del-Rey. On Thursday morning I was sent out with another
party on a foraging tour. On Thursday night I was sent in attendance
upon the officer who carried despatches to General Quitman. On Friday
morning I was set on guard between the hours of four and eight!"

"Oh, heaven, what an infamous abuse of military authority!" exclaimed
Herbert, indignantly.

"Herbert, in my life I have sometimes suffered with hunger, cold and
pain, and have some idea of what starving, freezing and torture may be,
but among all the ills to which flesh is heir, I doubt if there is one
so trying to the nerves and brain of man as enforced and long-continued
vigilance, when all his failing nature sinks for want of sleep.
Insanity and death must soon be the result."

"Humph! Go on. Tell me about the manner of their finding you," said
Herbert, scarcely able to repress his indignation.

"Well, when after--let me see--eighty-four--ninety--ninety-six hours of
incessant watching, riding and walking, I was set on guard to keep the
morning watch between four o'clock and eight, 'my whole head was sick
and my whole heart faint'; my frame was sinking; my soul could scarcely
hold my body upright. In addition to this physical suffering was the
mental anguish of feeling that these men had resolved upon my death,
and thinking of my dear mother and Clara, whose hearts would be broken
by my fall. Oh! the thought of them at this moment quite unmans me. I
must not reflect. Well, I endeavored with all the faculties of my mind
and body to keep awake. I kept steadily pacing to and fro, though I
could scarcely drag one limb after the other, or even stand upright;
sleep would arrest me while in motion, and I would drop my musket and
wake up in a panic, with the impression of some awful, overhanging ruin
appalling my soul. Herbert, will you think me a miserably weak wretch
if I tell you that that night was a night of mental and physical
horrors? Brain and nerves seemed in a state of disorganization; thought
and emotion were chaos; the relations of soul and body broken up. I had
but one strong, clear idea, namely, that I must keep awake at all
costs, or bring shameful death upon myself and disgrace upon my family.
And even in the very midst of thinking this I would fall asleep."

"No power within yourself could have prevented it; indeed, you had to
drop into sleep or death!"

"I pinched myself, I cut my flesh, I burned my skin, but all in vain.
Nothing could withstand the overwhelming power of sleep that finally
conquered me, about five o'clock this morning. Then, in the midst of a
delightful dream of mother and Clara and home, I was roused up by a
rude shake, and awoke to find my musket fallen from my hands, and my
Captain and Colonel standing over me. It was several minutes before I
could travel back from the pleasant land of sleep and dreams and
realize my real position. When I did I had nothing to say. The
inevitable ruin I felt had come, and crushed me into a sort of dumb
despair. Nor did my superior officers reproach me--their revenge was
too perfect. The captain called a sergeant to take my gun, and I was
marched off to my present prison. And, Herbert, no sooner was I left
alone here than sleep overcame me again, like a strong man, and despite
all the gloom and terror of my situation, despite all my thoughts of
home and mother and Clara, I slept like a tired child. But this
awakening. Oh! this awakening, Herbert!"

"Be of good courage. Let us hope that heaven will enable us to confound
the plots of the evil, and save you!"

"Ah, Herbert, that will be impossible. The duty of a soldier is clear
and stern; his punishment, if he fails in it, swift and sure. At the
word of command he must march into the very jaws of death, as is right.
He must die or madden for the want of rest, rather than fall asleep on
his post, for if he does, his punishment is certain and shameful death.
Oh, my mother! Oh, Clara! Would heaven I had fallen at Vera Cruz or
Churubusco, rather than live to bring this dreadful sorrow upon you,"
cried Traverse, covering his convulsed face with his hands.

"Cheer up, cheer up, old comrade. All is not lost that is endangered,
and we shall save you yet!"

"Herbert, you know it is impossible."

"No, I do not know any such thing!"

"You know that I shall be tried to-day and shot to-morrow! Oh, Herbert,
never let my dear ones at home know how I shall die. Tell them that I
fell before Chepultepec--which will be literally true, you know. Oh, my
mother! Oh, my dear Clara, shall I never see you more? Never hear your
sweet voices calling me? Never feel the kind clasp of your hands again?
Is this the end of a life of aspiration and endeavor? Is this the
comfort and happiness I was to bring you?--early bereavement, dishonored
names and broken hearts?"

"I tell you, no! You shall be saved! I say it!"

"Ah, it is impossible."

"No, it is only very difficult--so very difficult that I shall be sure
to accomplish it!"

"What a paradox!"

"It is a truth. Things difficult--almost to impossibility--can always
be accomplished. Write that upon your tablets, for it is a valuable
truth. And now cheer up, for I bring you letters from Clara and your
mother."

"Letters! from Clara! and mother! Oh, give them to me!" exclaimed the
young man eagerly.

Herbert handed them, and Traverse eagerly broke the seals, one after
another, and devoured the contents.

"They are well! They are well and happy! Oh, thank God they are so. Oh,
Herbert, never let them know how I shall die! If they think I fell
honorably in battle, they will get over it in time, but if they know I
died a convict's death it will break their hearts. Oh, Herbert, my dear
friend, by all our boyhood's love, never let my poor mother and dear
Clara know the manner of my death!" cried Traverse, in an imploring
voice.

Before he could say another word or Herbert could answer, an orderly
sergeant entered and put into Major Greyson's hands a paper that proved
to be a summons for him to attend immediately at headquarters to serve
upon a court-martial, to try Private Traverse Rocke upon the charge of
sleeping on his post.

"This is done on purpose to prevent me becoming a witness for the
defense!" whispered Herbert to his friend, "but take courage. We will
see yet whether you shall succeed!"




CHAPTER XXII.

THE COURT-MARTIAL.

              I wish I could
    Meet all accusers with as good excuse,
    As well as I am certain I can clear
              Myself of this.

                          --Shakespeare.


Pursuant with the general orders issued from headquarters, the
court-martial, consisting of thirteen officers, convened at Tacubaya,
for the trial of Traverse Rocke, private in the ---- Regiment of
Infantry, accused of sleeping on his post.

It was a sultry morning, early in September, and by seven o'clock the
drum was heard beating before the Archiepiscopal palace, where it was
understood the trial, involving life or death, would come off.

The two sentinels on guard before the doors and a few officers off
duty, loitering about the verandas, were the only persons visible near
the well-ordered premises, until the members of the court-martial, with
the prosecutors and witnesses, began to assemble and pass in.

Within a lofty apartment of the building, which was probably at one
time the great dining-hall of the priests, were collected some twenty
persons, comprising the court-martial and its attendants.

An extension table covered with green cloth occupied the middle of the
long room.

At the head of this table sat General W., the president of the court.
On his right and left, at the sides of the table, were arranged the
other members according to their rank.

At a smaller table, near the right hand of the President, stood the
Judge Advocate or prosecutor on behalf of the United States.

At the door stood a sentinel on guard, and near him two or three
orderly sergeants in attendance upon the officers.

The Judge Advocate opened the court by calling over the names of the
members, beginning with the President and ending with the youngest
officer present, and recording them as they responded.

This preliminary settled, orders were despatched to bring the prisoner,
prosecutor and witnesses into court.

And in a few minutes entered Colonel Le Noir, Captain Zuten, Ensign
Allen and Sergeant Baker. They were accommodated with seats near the
left hand of the President.

Lastly, the prisoner was brought in guarded, and placed standing at the
foot of the table.

Traverse looked pale, from the severe effects of excessive fatigue and
anxiety, but he deported himself with firmness and dignity, bowed
respectfully to the court, and then drew his stately form up to its
fullest height, and stood awaiting the proceedings.

The Judge Advocate at the order of the President, commenced and read
the warrant for holding the court. He then read over the names of the
members, commencing as before, with the President, and descending
through the gradations of rank to the youngest officer, and demanded of
the prisoner whether he had any cause of challenge, or took any
exception to any member present, and if so, to declare it, as was his
privilege.

Traverse lifted his noble head and keen eyes, and looked slowly around,
in turn, upon each officer of the court-martial.

They might all be said to be strangers to him, since he knew them only
by sight--all except his old acquaintance, Herbert Greyson, who sat
first at the left hand of the President, and who returned his look of
scrutiny with a gaze full of encouragement.

"I find no cause of challenge, and take no exception to any among the
officers composing this court," answered Traverse, again bowing with
such sweetness and dignity in tone and gesture that the officers, in
surprise, looked first at the prisoner and then at each other. No one
could doubt that the accused, in the humble garb of a private soldier,
was nevertheless a man of education and refinement--a true gentleman,
both in birth and breeding.

As no challenge was made, the Judge Advocate proceeded to administer to
each of the members of the court the oath prescribed in the Articles of
War, to the intent that they should "try the matter before them,
between the prisoner and the United States, according to the evidence,
without fear, favor or affection."

This oath was taken by each member holding up his right hand and
repeating the words after the officer.

The court then being regularly constituted, and every preliminary form
observed, the Judge Advocate arose and directed the prisoner to listen
to the charge brought against him, and preferred by the Colonel of his
Regiment, Gabriel Le Noir.

Traverse raised his head and fixed his eagle eyes upon the prosecutor,
who stood beside the Judge Advocate, while the latter in an audible
voice read the accusation, charging the prisoner with wilful neglect of
duty, in that he, the said Traverse Rocke, on the night of the first of
September, being placed on guard at the northwestern outpost of the
Infantry quarters, at Tacubaya, did fall asleep upon his post, thereby
endangering the safety of the quarters, and violating the 46th Article
of War.

To which charge the prisoner, in a firm voice, replied:

"Not guilty of wilful neglect of duty, though found sleeping upon my
post."

The Judge Advocate then cautioned all witnesses to withdraw from the
court and come only as they were called. They withdrew, and he then
arranged some preliminaries of the examination, and called in--Captain
Zuten, of the ---- Regiment of Infantry.

This witness was a short, coarse-featured, red-haired person of Dutch
extraction, without intellect enough to enable him to conceal the
malignity of his nature.

He testified that on Thursday, the first of September, Traverse Rocke,
private in his company, was ordered on guard at the northwestern
outpost of the quarters, between the hours of four and eight a.m. That
about five o'clock on the same morning, he, Joseph Zuten, in making his
usual rounds, and being accompanied on that occasion by Colonel Gabriel
Le Noir, Lieutenant Adams and Ensign Baker, did surprise Private
Traverse Rocke asleep on his post leaning against the sentry box with
his musket at his feet.

This witness was cross-examined by the Judge Advocate, who, it is
known, combines in his own person the office of prosecutor on the part
of the United States and counsel for the prisoner, or rather, if he be
honest, he acts as impartial inquirer and arbiter between the two.

As no new facts were gained by the cross-examination, the Judge
Advocate proceeded to call the next witness, Colonel Le Noir.

Here, then, was a gentleman of most prepossessing exterior, as well as
of most irreproachable reputation.

In brief, his testimony corroborated that of the foregoing witness, as
to the finding of the prisoner asleep on his post at the time and place
specified. In honor of his high social and military standing, this
witness was not cross-examined.

The next called was Lieutenant Adams, who corroborated the evidence of
former witnesses. The last person examined was Ensign Baker, whose
testimony corresponded exactly to that of all who had gone before him.

The Judge Advocate then briefly summed up the case on the part of the
United States--first by reading the 46th Article of War, to wit, that:

"Any sentinel who shall be found sleeping on his post, or shall leave
it before he shall be regularly relieved, shall suffer death," etc.,
etc., etc.

And secondly, by reading the recorded evidence to the effect that:

Traverse Rocke had been found by competent witnesses sleeping on his
post.

And concluded by saying:

"Gentlemen, officers of the court-martial, here is the law and here is
the fact both proven, and it remains for the court to find a verdict in
accordance with both."

The prisoner was then put upon his defence.

Traverse Rocke drew himself up and said, that the truth, like the
blessed sun, must, on its shining forth, dispel all clouds of error;
that, trusting in the power of truth, he should briefly relate the
history of the preceding seven days. And then he commenced and narrated
the facts with which the reader is already acquainted.

Traverse was interrupted several times in the course of his narrative
by the President, General W., a severe martinet, who reminded him that
an attempt to criminate his superior officers would only injure his
cause before the court.

Traverse, bowing, as in duty bound to the President at every fresh
interruption, nevertheless proceeded straight on with his narrative to
its conclusion.

The defence being closed, the Judge Advocate arose, as was his
privilege, to have the last word. He stated that if the prisoner had
been oppressed or aggrieved by his superior officer, his remedy lay in
the 35th of the Articles of War, providing that any soldier who shall
feel himself wronged by his captain shall complain thereof to the
Colonel of his Regiment.

To this the prisoner begged to reply that he had considered the Colonel
of his Regiment his personal enemy, and as such could have little hope
of the issue, even if he had had opportunity afforded him, of appealing
to that authority.

The Judge Advocate expressed his belief that this complaint was
vexatious and groundless.

And here the evidence was closed, the prosecutor, prisoner and
witnesses dismissed, and the court adjourned to meet again to
deliberate with closed doors.

It was a period of awful suspense with Traverse Rocke. The prospect
seemed dark for him.

The fact of the offense and the law affixing the penalty of death to
that offence was established, and as the Judge Advocate truly said,
nothing remained but for the court to find their verdict in accordance
to both.

Extenuating circumstances there were certainly; but extenuating
circumstances were seldom admitted in courts-martial, the law and
practice of which were severe to the extent of cruelty.

Another circumstance against him was the fact that it did not require
an unanimous vote to render a legal verdict, but that if a majority of
two-thirds should vote for conviction, the fate of the prisoner would
be sealed. Traverse had but one friend in the court, and what could his
single voice do against so many? Apparently nothing: yet, as the
prisoner on leaving the court-room, raised his eyes to that friend,
Herbert Greyson returned the look with a glance of more than
encouragement--of triumph.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE VERDICT.

    We must not make a scare-crow of the law,
    Setting it up to frighten birds of prey;
    And let it keep one shape till custom makes it,
    Their perch and not their terror.

                          --Shakespeare.


The members of a court-martial sit in the double capacity of jurors and
judges; as jurors they find the facts, and as judges they award the
punishment. Yet their session with closed doors was without the solemn
formality that the uninitiated might have supposed to attend a grave
deliberation upon a matter of guilt or innocence involving a question
of life or death.

No sooner were the doors closed that shut out the "vulgar" crowd, than
the "high and mighty" officials immediately fell into easy attitudes,
and disengaged conversation upon the weather, the climate, yesterday's
dinner at General Cushion's quarters, the claret, the cigars and the
Mexican signoritas.

They were presently recalled from this easy chat by the President, a
severe disciplinarian, who reminded them rather sharply of the business
upon which they had convened.

The officers immediately wheeled themselves around in the chairs,
facing the table, and fell into order.

The Judge Advocate seated himself at his detached stand, opened his
book, called the attention of the court, and commenced and read over
the whole record of the evidence and the proceedings up to this time.

The President then said:

"For my own part, gentlemen, I think this quite a simple matter,
requiring but little deliberation. Here is the fact of the offence
proved, and here is the law upon that offence clearly defined. Nothing
seems to remain for us to do but to bring in a verdict in accordance
with the law and the fact."

Several of the older officers and sterner disciplinarians agreed with
the President, who now said:

"I move that the vote be immediately taken upon this question."

To this, also, the elder officers assented. And the Judge Advocate was
preparing to take the ballot, when one of the younger members arose and
said:

"Mr. President and gentlemen, there are mitigating circumstances
attending this offence, which, in my opinion, should be duly weighed
before making up our ballot."

"Lieutenant Lovel, when your hair has grown white in the service of
your country, as mine has, and when your skin is mottled with the scars
of a score of well-fought fields, you will find your soft theories
corrected by hard experience, and you will know that in the case of a
sentinel sleeping upon his post there can be no mitigating
circumstances; that nothing can palliate such flagrant and dangerous
neglect, involving the safety of the whole army; a crime that martial
law and custom have very necessarily made punishable by death," said
the President, sternly.

The young lieutenant sat down abashed, under the impression that he had
betrayed himself into some act of gross impropriety. This was his first
appearance in the character of juror and judge; he was literally
unaccustomed to public speaking, and did not hazard a reply.

"Has any other gentleman any views to advance before we proceed to a
general ballot?" inquired the President.

Several of the officers whispered together, and then some one replied
that there seemed to be no reason why the vote should not be
immediately taken.

Herbert Greyson remained perfectly silent. Why he did not speak then,
in reply to this adjuration--why, indeed, he had not spoken before, in
support of Lieutenant Lovel's views in favor of his friend, I do not
know to this day, though I mean to ask him the first time I have the
opportunity. Perhaps he wished to "draw the enemy's fire," perhaps he
was inclined to dramatic effects; but whatever might have been the
motive, he continued silent, offering no obstacle to the immediate
taking of the vote.

The Judge Advocate then called the court to order for the taking of the
ballot, and proceeded to question the members in turn, commencing with
the youngest.

"How say you, Lieutenant Lovel, is the prisoner on trial guilty or not
guilty of the offence laid to his charge?"

"Guilty," responded the young officer, as his eyes filled with tears of
pity for the other young life against which he had felt obliged to
record this vote.

"If that is the opinion of one who seems friendly to him, what will be
the votes of the other stern judges?" said Herbert Greyson to himself,
in dismay.

"What say you, Lieutenant Adams--is the prisoner guilty or not guilty?"
said the Judge Advocate, proceeding with the ballot.

"Guilty!"

"Lieutenant Cragin?"

"Guilty!"

"Lieutenant Evans?"

"Guilty!"

"Lieutenant Goffe?"

"Guilty!"

"Lieutenant Hesse?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain Kingsley?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain McConkey?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain Lucas?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain O'Donnelly?"

"Guilty!"

"Captain Rosencrantz?"

"Guilty!"

"Major Greyson?"

"NOT GUILTY!"

Every officer sprang to his feet and gazed in astonishment,
consternation and indignant inquiry upon the renderer of this
unprecedented vote.

The President was the first to speak, breaking out with:

"Sir! Major Greyson! your vote, sir, in direct defiance of the fact and
the law upon it, is unprecedented, sir, in the whole history of
court-martial!"

"I record it as uttered, nevertheless," replied Herbert.

"And your oath, sir! What becomes of your oath as a judge of this
court?"

"I regard my oath in my vote!"

"What, sir?" inquired Captain McConkey, "do you mean to say that you
have rendered that vote in accordance with the facts elicited in
evidence, as by your oath you were bound to do?"

"Yes."

"How, sir, do you mean to say that the prisoner did not sleep upon his
post?"

"Certainly I do not; on the contrary, I grant that he did sleep upon
his post, and yet I maintain that in doing so he was not guilty!"

"Major Greyson plays with us," said the President.

"By no means, sir! I never was in more solemn earnest than at present!
Your honor, the President and gentlemen judges of the court, as I am
not counsel for the prisoner, nor civil officer, nor lawyer, of whose
interference courts-martial are proverbially jealous, I beg you will
permit me to say a few words in support, or at least, I will say, in
explanation of the vote which you have characterized as an opinion in
opposition to fact and law, and unprecedented in the whole history of
courts-martial."

"Yes, it is! it is!" said General W., shifting uneasily in his seat.

"You heard the defense of the prisoner," continued Herbert; "you heard
the narrative of his wrongs and sufferings, to the truth of which his
every aspect bore testimony. I will not here express a judgment as to
the motives that prompted his superior officers, I will merely advert
to the facts themselves, in order to prove that the prisoner, under the
circumstances, could not, with his human power, have done otherwise
than he did."

"Sir, if the prisoner considered himself wronged by his captain, which
is very doubtful, he could have appealed to the Colonel of his
Regiment!"

"Sir, the Articles of War accord him that privilege. But is it ever
taken advantage of? Is there a case on record where a private soldier
ventures to make a dangerous enemy of his immediate superior by
complaining of his Captain to his Colonel? Nor in this case would it
have been of the least use, inasmuch as this soldier had well-founded
reasons for believing the Colonel of his regiment his personal enemy,
and the Captain as the instrument of this enmity."

"And you, Major Greyson, do you coincide in the opinion of the
prisoner? Do you think that there could have been anything in common
between the Colonel of the regiment and the poor private in the ranks,
to explain such an equalizing sentiment as enmity?" inquired Captain
O'Donnelly.

"I answer distinctly, yes, sir! In the first place, this poor private
is a young gentleman of birth and education, the heir of one of the
most important estates in Virginia, and the betrothed of one of the
most lovely girls in the world. In both these capacities he has stood
in the way of Colonel Le Noir, standing between him and the estate on
the one hand, and between him and the young lady on the other. He has
disappointed Le Noir both in love and ambition. And he has thereby made
an enemy of the man who has, besides, the nearest interest in his
destruction. Gentlemen, what I say now in the absence of Colonel Le
Noir, I am prepared to repeat in his presence, and maintain at the
proper time and place."

"But how came this young gentleman of birth and expectations to be
found in the ranks?" inquired Captain Rosencrantz.

"How came we to have headstrong sons of wealthy parents, fast young men
of fortune, and runaway students from the universities and colleges of
the United States in our ranks? In a burst of boyish impatience the
youth enlisted. Destiny gave him as the Colonel of his regiment his
mortal enemy. Colonel Le Noir found in Captain Zuten a ready instrument
for his malignity. And between them both they have done all that could
possibly be effected to defeat the good fortune and insure the
destruction of Traverse Rocke. And I repeat, gentlemen, that what I
feel constrained to affirm here in the absence of those officers, I
shall assuredly reassert and maintain in their presence, upon the
proper occasion. In fact I shall bring formal charges against Colonel
Le Noir and Captain Zuten, of conduct unworthy of officers and
gentlemen!"

"But it seems to me that this is not directly to the point at issue,"
said Captain Kingsley.

"On the contrary, sir, it is the point, the whole point, and only
point, as you shall presently see by attending to the facts that I
shall recall to your memory. You and all present must, then, see that
there was a deliberate purpose to effect the ruin of this young man. He
is accused of having been found sleeping on his post, the penalty of
which, in time of war, is death. Now listen to the history of the days
that preceded his fault, and tell me if human nature could have
withstood the trial?"

"Sunday night was the last of repose to the prisoner until Friday
morning, when he was found asleep on his post.

"Monday night he was sent with the reconnoitering party to Casa-de-Mata.

"Tuesday he was sent with the officer that carried our General's
expostulation to Santa Anna. At night he was put on guard.

"Wednesday he was sent with another party to protect a band of emigrants
crossing the marshes. At night he was sent with still another party to
reconnoiter Molina-del-Rey.

"Thursday he was sent in attendance upon the officer that carried
despatches to General Quitman, and did not return until after midnight,
when, thoroughly worn out, driven indeed to the extreme degree of
mortal endurance, he was again on a sultry, oppressive night, in a
still, solitary place, set on guard where a few hours later he was
found asleep upon his post--by whom? The Colonel of his regiment and
the Captain of his company, who seemed bent upon his ruin--as I hold
myself bound to establish before another court-martial.

"This result had been intended from the first! If five nights' loss of
sleep would not have effected this, fifteen probably would; if fifteen
would not, thirty would; or if thirty wouldn't sixty would!--and all
this Captain Zuten had the power to enforce until his doomed victim
should fall into the hands of the provost-marshal, and into the arms of
death!

"And now, gentlemen, in view of all these circumstances, I ask you--was
Traverse Rocke guilty of wilful neglect of duty in dropping asleep on
his post? And I move for a reconsideration, and a new ballot!"

"Such a thing is without precedent, sir! These mitigating circumstances
may be brought to bear on the Commander-in-Chief, and may be embodied
in a recommendation to mercy! They should have no weight in the finding
of the verdict," said the President, "which should be in accordance
with the fact and the law."

"And with justice and humanity! to find a verdict against this young
man would be to place an unmerited brand upon his spotless name, that
no after clemency of the Executive could wipe out! Gentlemen, will you
do this! No! I am sure that you will not! And again I move for a new
ballot!"

"I second the motion!" said Lieutenant Lovel, rising quite encouraged
to believe in his own first instincts, which had been so favorable.

"Gentlemen," said the President sternly, "this thing is without
precedent! In all the annals of courts-martial, without precedent!"

"Then, if there is no such precedent, it is quite time that such a one
were established, so that the iron car of literal law should not always
roll over and crush justice! Gentlemen, shall we have a new ballot?"

"Yes! yes! yes!" were the answers.

"It is irregular! It is illegal! It is unprecedented! A new ballot?
Never heard of such a thing in forty years of military life! Lord bless
my soul, what is the service coming to!"

"A new ballot! a new ballot! a new ballot!" was the unanimous cry.

The President groaned in spirit, and recorded a vow never to forgive
Herbert Greyson for this departure from routine.

The new ballot demanded by acclamation had to be held.

The Judge Advocate called the court to order and began anew. The votes
were taken as before, commencing with the young lieutenant, who now
responded sonorously:

"Not guilty!"

And so it ran around the entire circle.

"Not guilty!" "Not guilty!" "Not guilty!" were the hearty responses of
the court.

The acquittal was unanimous. The verdict was recorded.

The doors were then thrown open to the public, and the prisoner called
in and publicly discharged from custody.

The court then adjourned.

Traverse Rocke threw himself upon the bosom of his friend, exclaiming
in a broken voice:

"I cannot sufficiently thank you! My dear mother and Clara will do
that!"

"Nonsense!" said Herbert laughing; "didn't I tell you that the Lord
reigns, and the devil is a fool? This is only the beginning of
victories!"




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE END OF THE WAR.

    Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,
    Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
    Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
    Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
    Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front,
    And now instead of mounting barbed steeds,
    To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
    He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber,
    To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.

                          --Shakespeare.


Ten days later Molina-del-Rey, Casa-de-Mata, and Chapultepec had
fallen! The United States forces occupied the city of Mexico, General
Scott was in the Grand Plaza, and the American standard waved above the
capital of the Montezumas!

Let those who have a taste for swords and muskets, drums and trumpets,
blood and fire, describe the desperate battles and splendid victories
that led to this final magnificent triumph!

My business lies with the persons of our story, to illustrate whom I
must pick out a few isolated instances of heroism in this glorious
campaign.

Herbert Greyson's division was a portion of the gallant Eleventh that
charged the Mexican batteries on Molina-del-Rey. He covered his name
with glory, and qualified himself to merit the command of the regiment,
which he afterwards received.

Traverse Rocke fought like a young Paladin. When they were marching
into the very mouths of the cannon they were vomiting fire upon them,
and when the young ensign of his company was struck down before him,
Traverse Rocke took the colors from his falling hand, and crying
"Victory!" pressed onward and upward over the dead and the dying, and
springing upon one of the guns which continued to belch forth fire, he
thrice waved the flag over his head and then planted it upon the
battery. Captain Zuten fell in the subsequent assault upon Chapultepec.

Colonel Le Noir entered the city of Mexico with the victorious army,
but on the subsequent day, being engaged in a street skirmish with the
leperos, or liberated convicts, he fell mortally wounded by a copper
bullet, and he was now dying by inches at his quarters near the Grand
Cathedral.

It was on the evening of the 20th of September, six days from the
triumphant entry of General Scott into the capital, that Major Greyson
was seated at supper at his quarters, with some of his brother
officers, when an orderly entered and handed a note to Herbert, which
proved to be a communication from the surgeon of their regiment,
begging him to repair without delay to the quarters of Colonel Le Noir,
who, being in extremity, desired to see him.

Major Greyson immediately excused himself to his company, and repaired
to the quarters of the dying man.

He found Colonel Le Noir stretched upon his bed in a state of extreme
exhaustion and attended by the surgeon and chaplain of his regiment.

As Herbert advanced to the side of his bed, Le Noir stretched out his
pale hand and said:

"You bear no grudge against a dying man, Greyson?"

"Certainly not," said Herbert, "especially when he proposes doing the
right thing, as I judge you do, from the fact of your sending for me."

"Yes, I do; I do!" replied Le Noir, pressing the hand that Herbert's
kindness of heart could not withhold.

Le Noir then beckoned the minister to hand him two sealed packets,
which he took and laid upon the bed before him.

Then taking up the larger of the two packets, he placed it in the hands
of Herbert Greyson, saying:

"There, Greyson, I wish you to hand that to your friend, young Rocke,
who has received his colors, I understand?"

"Yes, he has now the rank of ensign."

"Then give this parcel into the hands of Ensign Rocke, with the
request, that being freely yielded up, they may not be used in any
manner to harass the last hours of a dying man."

"I promise, on the part of my noble young friend, that they shall not
be so used," said Herbert, as he took possession of the parcel.

Le Noir then took up the second packet, which was much smaller, but
much more firmly secured, than the first, being in an envelope of
parchment, sealed with three great seals.

Le Noir held it in his hand for a moment, gazing from the surgeon to
the chaplain, and thence down upon the mysterious packet, while spasms
of pain convulsed his countenance. At length he spoke:

"This second packet, Greyson, contains a--well, I may as well call it a
narrative. I confide it to your care upon these conditions--that it
shall not be opened until after my death and funeral, and that, when it
has served its purpose of restitution, it may be, as far as possible,
forgotten. Will you promise me this?"

"On my honor, yes," responded the young man, as he received the second
parcel.

"This is all I have to say, except this--that you seemed to me, upon
every account, the most proper person to whom I could confide this
trust. I thank you for accepting it, and I believe that I may safely
promise that you will find the contents of the smaller packet of great
importance and advantage to yourself and those dear to you."

Herbert bowed in silence.

"That is all, good-by. I wish now to be alone with our chaplain," said
Colonel Le Noir, extending his hand.

Herbert pressed that wasted hand; silently sent up a prayer for the
dying wrong-doer, bowed gravely and withdrew.

It was almost eight o'clock, and Herbert thought that he would scarcely
have time to find Traverse before the drum should beat to quarters.

He was more fortunate than he had anticipated, for he had scarcely
turned the Grand Cathedral when he came full upon the young ensign.

"Ah! Traverse, I am very glad to meet you! I was just going to look for
you. Come immediately to my rooms, for I have a very important
communication to make to you. Colonel Le Noir is supposed to be dying.
He has given me a parcel to be handed to you, which I shrewdly suspect
to contain your intercepted correspondence for the last two years,"
said Herbert.

Traverse started and gazed upon his friend in amazement, and was about
to express his astonishment, when Herbert, seeing others approach, drew
the arm of his friend within his own, and they hurried silently on
toward Major Greyson's quarters.

They had scarcely got in and closed the door and stricken a light
before Traverse exclaimed impatiently:

"Give it me!" and almost snatched the parcel from Herbert's hands.

"Whist! don't be impatient! I dare say it is all stale news!" said
Herbert, as he yielded up the prize.

They sat down together on each side of a little stand supporting a
light.

Herbert watched with sympathetic interest while Traverse tore open the
envelope and examined its contents.

They were, as Herbert had anticipated, letters from the mother and the
betrothed of Traverse--letters that had arrived and been intercepted,
from time to time, for the preceding two years.

There were blanks, also, directed in a hand strange to Traverse, but
familiar to Herbert as that of Old Hurricane, and those blanks inclosed
drafts upon a New Orleans bank, payable to the order of Traverse Rocke.

Traverse pushed all these latter aside with scarcely a glance and not a
word of inquiry, and began eagerly to examine the long-desired,
long-withheld letters from the dear ones at home.

His cheek flamed to see that every seal was broken, and the fresh aroma
of every heart-breathed word inhaled by others, before they reached
himself.

"Look here, Herbert! look here! Is not this insufferable? Every fond
word of my mother, every delicate and sacred expression of--of regard
from Clara, all read by the profane eyes of that man!"

"That man is on his deathbed, Traverse, and you must forgive him! He
has restored your letters."

"Yes, after their sacred privacy has been profaned! Oh!"

Traverse handed his mother's letters over to Herbert, that his foster
brother might read them, but Clara's "sacred epistles" were kept to
himself.

"What are you laughing at?" inquired Traverse, looking up from his
page, and detecting Herbert with a smile upon his face.

"I am thinking that you are not as generous as you were some few years
since, when you would have given me Clara herself; for now you will not
even let me have a glimpse of her letters!"

"Have they not been already sufficiently published?" said Traverse,
with an almost girlish smile and blush.

When those cherished letters were all read and put away, Traverse
stooped down and "fished up" from amidst envelopes, strings and waste
paper another set of letters which proved to be the blanks inclosing
the checks, of various dates, which Herbert recognized as coming
anonymously from Old Hurricane.

"What in the world is the meaning of all this, Herbert? Have I a nabob
uncle turned up anywhere, do you think? Look here!--a hundred dollars--and
a fifty, and another--all drafts upon the Planters' Bank, New Orleans,
drawn in my favor and signed by Largent & Dor, bankers!--I, that
haven't had five dollars at a time to call my own for the last two
years! Here, Herbert, give me a good, sharp pinch to wake me up! I may
be sleeping on my post again?" said Traverse in perplexity.

"You are not sleeping, Traverse!"

"Are you sure?"

"Perfectly," replied Herbert, laughing.

"Well, then, do you think that crack upon the crown of my head that I
got upon Chapultepec has not injured my intellect?"

"Not in the slightest degree!" said Herbert, still laughing at his
friend's perplexity.

"Then I am the hero of a fairy tale, that is all--a fairy tale in which
waste paper is changed into bank notes and private soldiers prince
palatines! Look here!" cried Traverse, desperately, thrusting the bank
checks under the nose of his friend, "do you see those things and know
what they are, and will you tell me that everything in this castle
don't go by enchantment?"

"Yes, I see what they are, and it seems to me perfectly natural that
you should have them!"

"Humph!" said Traverse, looking at Herbert with an expression that
seemed to say that he thought the wits of his friend deranged.

"Traverse," said Major Greyson, "did it never occur to you that you
must have other relatives in the world besides your mother? Well, I
suspect that those checks were sent by some relative of yours or your
mother's, who just begins to remember that he has been neglecting you."

"Herbert, do you know this?" inquired Traverse, anxiously.

"No, I do not know it; I only suspect this to be the case," said
Herbert, evasively. "But what is that which you are forgetting?"

"Oh! this--yes, I had forgotten it. Let us see what it is!" said
Traverse, examining a paper that had rested unobserved upon the stand.

"This is an order for my discharge, signed by the Secretary of War, and
dated--ha--ha--ha--two years ago! Here I have been serving two years
illegally, and if I had been convicted of neglect of duty in sleeping
on my post, I should have been shot unlawfully, as that man, when he
prosecuted me, knew perfectly well!" exclaimed Traverse.

"That man, as I said before, lies upon his deathbed! Remember, nothing
against him! But that order for a discharge! now that you are in the
way of promotion and the war is over, will you take advantage of it?"

"Decidedly, yes! for though I am said to have acquitted myself passably
well at Chapultepec----"

"Gloriously, Traverse! You won your colors gloriously!"

"Yet for all that my true mission is not to break men's bones, but to
set them when broken. Not to take men's lives, but to save them when
endangered! So to-morrow morning, please Providence, I shall present
this order to General Butler and apply for my discharge."

"And you will set out immediately for home?"

The face of Traverse suddenly changed.

"I should like to do so! Oh, how I should like to see my dear mother
and Clara, if only for a day! but I must not indulge the longing of my
heart. I must not go home until I can do so with honor!"

"And can you not do so now? You, who triumphed over all your personal
enemies and who won your colors at Chapultepec?"

"No, for all this was in my legitimate profession! Nor will I present
myself at home until, by the blessing of the Lord, I have done what I
set out to do, and established myself in a good practice. And so, by
the help of heaven, I hope within one week to be on my way to New
Orleans to try my fortune in that city."

"To New Orleans! And a new malignant fever of some horrible, unknown
type, raging there!" exclaimed Herbert.

"So much the more need of a physician! Herbert, I am not the least
uneasy on the subject of infection! I have a theory for its
annihilation."

"I never saw a clever young professional man without a theory!" laughed
Herbert.

The drum was now heard beating the tattoo, and the friends separated
with hearts full of revived hope.

The next morning Traverse presented the order of the Secretary to the
Commander-in-Chief and received his discharge.

And then, after writing long, loving and hopeful letters to his mother
and his betrothed, and entreating the former to try to find out who was
the secret benefactor who had sent him such timely aid, Traverse took
leave of his friends, and set out for the Southern Queen of Cities,
once more to seek his fortune.

Meantime the United States army continued to occupy the City of Mexico,
through the whole of the autumn and winter.

General Butler, who temporarily succeeded the illustrious Scott in the
chief command, very wisely arranged the terms of an armistice with the
enemy that was intended to last two months from the beginning of
February, but which happily lasted until the conclusion of the treaty
of peace between the two countries.

Colonel Le Noir had not been destined soon to die; his wound, an inward
canker from a copper bullet, that the surgeon had at length succeeded
in extracting, took the form of a chronic fester disease. Since the
night upon which he had been so extremely ill to be supposed dying, and
yet had rallied, the doctors felt no apprehensions of his speedy death,
though they gave no hopes of his final recovery.

Under these circumstances there were hours in which Le Noir bitterly
regretted his precipitation in permitting those important documents to
go out of his own hands. And he frequently sent for Herbert Greyson in
private to require assurances that he would not open the packet
confided to him before the occurrence of the event specified.

And Herbert always soothed the sufferer by reiterating his promise that
so long as Colonel Le Noir should survive the seals of that packet
should not be broken.

Beyond the suspicion that the parcel contained an important confession,
Herbert Greyson was entirely ignorant of its contents.

But the life of Gabriel Le Noir was prolonged beyond all human calculus
of probabilities.

He was spared to experience a more effectual repentance than that
spurious one into which he had been frightened by the seeming rapid
approach of death. And after seven months of lingering illness and
gradual decline, during the latter portions of which he was comforted
by the society of his only son, who had come at his summons to visit
him, in May, 1848, Gabriel Le Noir expired a sincere penitent,
reconciled to God and man.

And soon afterward, in the month of May, the treaty of peace having
been ratified by the Mexican Congress at Queretaro, the American army
evacuated the city and territory of Mexico.

And our brave soldiers, their "brows crowned with victorious wreaths,"
set out upon their return to home and friends.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE FORTUNATE BATH.

    Heaven has to all allotted soon or late
    Some lucky revolution of their fate;
    Whose motions if we watch and guide with skill
    (For human good depends on human will)
    Our fortune rolls as from a smooth descent.
    And from the first impression takes its bent.
    Now, now she meets you with a glorious prize,
    And spreads her locks before her as she files.

                          --Dryden.


Meanwhile, what had our young adventurer been doing in all these months
between September and June?

Traverse, with his two hundred dollars, had set out for New Orleans
about the first of October.

But by the time he had paid his traveling expenses and fitted himself
out with a respectable suit of professional black and a few necessary
books, his little capital had diminished three-quarters.

So that when he found himself settled in his new office, in a highly
respectable quarter of the city, he had but fifty dollars and a few
dimes left.

A portion of this sum was expended in a cheap sofa-bedstead, a closed
washstand and a spirit lamp coffee boiler, for Traverse determined to
lodge in his office and board himself--"which will have this additional
advantage," said the cheerful fellow to himself--"for besides saving me
from debt, it will keep me always on hand for calls."

The fever, though it was October, had scarcely abated; indeed, on the
contrary, it seemed to have revived and increased in virulency in
consequence of the premature return of many people who had fled on its
first appearance, and who in coming back too soon to the infected
atmosphere, were less able to withstand contagion than those who
remained.

That Traverse escaped the plague was owing not so much to his favorite
"theory" as to his vigorous constitution, pure blood and regular habits
of temperance, cleanliness and cheerful activity of mind and body.

Just then the demand was greater than the supply of medical service.
Traverse found plenty to do, and his pleasant, young face and hopeful
and confident manners won him great favor in sick rooms, where, whether
it were to be ascribed to his "theory," his "practice" or to the happy,
inspiring influence of his personal presence, or to all these together,
with the blessing of the Lord upon them, it is certain that he was very
successful in raising the sick. It is true that he did not earn five
dollars in as many days, for his practice, like that of almost every
very young professional man, was among the indigent.

But what of that? What if he were not running up heavy accounts against
wealthy patrons? He was "giving to the poor," not money, for he himself
was as poor as any of them; but his time, labor and professional skill;
he was "giving to the poor;" he was "lending to the Lord," and he
"liked the security." And the most successful speculator that ever made
a fortune on 'change never, never invested time, labor or money to a
surer advantage.

And this I would say for the encouragement of all young persons in
similar circumstances--do not be impatient if the "returns" are a
little while delayed, for they are so sure and so rich that they are
quite worth waiting for, nor will the waiting be long. Give your
services cheerfully, also, for "the Lord loveth a cheerful giver."

Traverse managed to keep out of debt; he regularly paid his office rent
and his laundress' bill; he daily purchased his mutton shop or pound of
beefsteak and broiled it himself; he made his coffee, swept and dusted
his office, put up his sofa-bed, blacked his boots; and oh! miracle of
independence, he mended his own gloves and sewed on his own shirt
buttons, for you may depend that the widow's son knew how to do all
these things; nor was there a bit of hardship in his having so to wait
upon himself, though if his mother and Clara, in their well-provided
and comfortable home at Willow Heights, had only known how destitute
the young man was of female aid and comfort, how they would have cried!

"No one but himself to mend his poor dear gloves! Oh--oh-boo-hoo-oo!"

Traverse never alluded to his straitened circumstances, but boasted of
the comfort of his quarters and the extent of his practice, and
declared that his income already exceeded his outlay, which was
perfectly true, since he was resolved to live within it, whatever it
might be.

As the fever began to subside Traverse's practice declined, and about
the middle of November his "occupation was gone."

We said that his office was in the most respectable locality in the
city; it was, in fact, on the ground floor of a first-class hotel.

It happened that one night, near the close of winter, Traverse lay
awake on his sofa-bedstead, turning over in his mind how he should
contrive to make both ends meet at the conclusion of the present term
and feeling as near despondency as it was possible for his buoyant and
God-trusting soul to be, when there came a loud ringing at his office
bell.

This reminded him of the stirring days and nights of the preceding
autumn. He started up at once to answer the summons.

"Who's there?"

"Is Doctor Rocke in?"

"Yes, what's wanted?"

"A gentleman, sir, in the house here, sir, taken very bad, wants the
doctor directly, room number 555."

"Very well, I will be with the gentleman immediately," answered
Traverse, plunging his head into a basin of cold water and drying it
hastily.

In five minutes Traverse was in the office of the hotel, inquiring for
a waiter to show him up into 555.

One was ordered to attend him, who led the way up several flights of
stairs and around divers galleries, until he opened a door and ushered
the doctor immediately into the sick room.

There was a little, old, dried-up Frenchman in a blue night-cap,
extended on a bed in the middle of the room and covered with a white
counterpane that clung close to his rigid form as to a corpse.

And there was a little, old, dried-up Frenchwoman in a brown merino
gown and a high-crowned muslin cap who hopped and chattered about the
bed like a frightened magpie.

"Ou! Monsieur le Docteur!" she screamed, jumping at Traverse in a way
to make him start back; "Ou, Monsieur le Docteur, I am very happy you
to see! Voil mon frre! Behold my brother! He is ill! He is verra ill!
He is dead! He is verra dead!"

"I hope not," said Traverse, approaching the bed.

"Voil, behold! Mon dieu, he is verra still! He is verra cold! He is
verra dead! What can you, mon frre, my brother to save?"

"Be composed, madam, if you please, and allow me to examine my
patient," said Traverse.

"Ma foi! I know not what you speak 'compose.' What can you my brother
to save?"

"Much, I hope, madam, but you must leave me to examine my patient and
not interrupt me," said Traverse, passing his hand over the naked chest
of the sick man.

"Mon Dieu! I know not 'exam' and 'interrupt'! and I know not what can
you mon frre to save!"

"If you don't hush parley-vooing, the doctor can do nothink, mum," said
the waiter, in a respectful tone.

Traverse found his patient in a bad condition--in a stupor, if not in a
state of positive insensibility. The surface of his body was cold as
ice, and apparently without the least vitality. If he was not, as his
sister had expressed it, "very dead," he was certainly "next to it."

By close questioning, and by putting his questions in various forms,
the doctor learned from the chattering little magpie of a Frenchwoman
that the patient had been ill for nine days; that he had been under the
care of Monsieur le Doctor Cartiere; that there had been a consultation
of physicians; that they had prescribed for him and given him over:
that le Docteur Cartiere still attended him, but was at this instant in
attendance as accoucheur to a lady in extreme danger, whom he could not
leave; but Doctor Cartiere had directed them, in his unavoidable
absence, to call in the skilful, the talented, the soon to be
illustrious young Docteur Rocque, who was also near at hand.

The heart of Traverse thrilled with joy. The Lord had remembered him!
His best skill spent upon the poor and needy who could make him no
return, but whose lives he had succeeded in saving, had reached the
ears of the celebrated Dr. C., who had with the unobtrusive magnanimity
of real genius quietly recommended him to his own patrons.

Oh! well, he would do his very best, not only to advance his own
professional interests, and to please his mother and Clara, but also to
do honor to the magnanimous Doctor C.'s recommendation!

Here, too, was an opportunity of putting in practise his favorite
theory; but first of all it was necessary to be informed of the
preceding mode of treatment and its results.

So he further questioned the little, restless magpie, and by
ingeniously framed inquiries succeeded in gaining from her the
necessary knowledge of his patient's antecedents. He examined all the
medicines that had been used, and informed himself of their effects
upon the disease. But the most serious difficulty of all seemed to be
the impossibility of raising vital action upon the cold, dead skin.

The chattering little woman informed him that the patient had been
covered with blisters that would not "pull," that would not
"delineate," that would not, what call you it--"draw!"

Traverse could easily believe this, for not only the skin, but the very
flesh of the old doctor seemed bloodless and lifeless.

Now for his theory! What would kill a healthy man with a perfect
circulation might save the life of this dying one, whose whole surface,
inch deep, seemed already dead.

"Put him in a bath of mustard water, as hot as you can bear your own
hand in and continue to raise the temperature slowly, watching the
effect, for about five minutes. I will go down and prepare a cordial
draught to be taken the moment he gets back to bed," said Doctor Rocke,
who immediately left the room.

His directions were all but too well obeyed. The bathing tub was
quickly brought into the chamber and filled with water as hot as the
nurse could bear her hand in, then the invalid was hastily invested in
a slight bathing gown and lifted by two servants and laid in the hot
bath.

"Now, bring quickly, water boiling," said the little, old woman,
imperatively. And when a large copper kettleful was forthcoming, she
took it and began to pour a stream of hissing, bubbling water in at the
foot of the bath.

The skin of the torpid patient had been reddening for a few seconds, so
as to prove that its sensibility was returning, and now when the stream
from the kettle began to mix with the already very hot bath, and to
raise its temperature almost to boiling, suddenly there was heard a cry
from the bath, and the patient, with the agility of youth and health,
skipped out of the tub and into his bed, kicking vigorously and
exclaiming:

"Brigands! Assassins! You have scalded my legs to death!"

"Glory be to the Lord, he's saved!" cried one of the waiters, a devout
Irishman.

"Ciel! he speaks! he moves! he lives! mon frre!" cried the little
Frenchwoman, going to him.

"Ah, murderers! bandits! you've scalded me to death! I'll have you all
before the commissaire!"

"He scolds! he threatens! he swears! he gets well! mon frre!" cried
the old woman, busying herself to change his clothes and put on his
flannel nightgown. They then tucked him up warmly in bed and put
bottles of hot water all around, to keep up this newly stimulated
circulation.

At that moment Dr. Rocke came in, put his hand into the bath-tub and
could scarcely repress a cry of pain and of horror--the water scalded
his fingers! What must it have done to the sick man?

"Good heavens, madam! I did not tell you to parboil your patient!"
exclaimed Traverse, speaking to the old woman. Traverse was shocked to
find how perilously his orders had been exceeded.

"Eh bien, Monsieur! he lives! he does well! voil mon frre!" exclaimed
the little old woman.

It was true: the accidental "boiling bath," as it might almost be
called, had effected what perhaps no other means in the world could--a
restored circulation.

The disease was broken up, and the convalescence of the patient was
rapid. And as Traverse kept his own secret concerning the accidental
high temperature of that bath, which every one considered a fearful and
successful experiment, the fame of Dr. Rocke spread over the whole city
and country.

He would soon have made a fortune in New Orleans, had not the hand of
destiny beckoned him elsewhere. It happened thus:

The old Frenchman whose life Traverse had, partly by accident and
partly by design, succeeded in saving, comprehended perfectly well how
narrow his escape from death had been, and attributed his restoration
solely to the genius, skill and boldness of his young physician, and
was grateful accordingly with all a Frenchman's noisy demonstration.

He called Traverse his friend, his deliverer, his son.

One day, as soon as he found himself strong enough to think of pursuing
his journey, he called his "son" into the room and explained to him
that he, Doctor Pierre St. Jean, was the proprietor of a private insane
asylum, very exclusive, very quiet, very aristocratic, indeed,
receiving none but patients of the highest rank; that this retreat was
situated on the wooded banks of a charming lake in one of the most
healthy and beautiful neighborhoods of East Feliciana; that he had
originally come down to the city to engage the services of some young
physician of talent as his assistant, and finally, that he would be
delighted, enraptured if "his deliverer, his friend, his son," would
accept the post.

Now Traverse particularly wished to study the various phases of mental
derangement, a department of his professional education that had
hitherto been opened to him only through books.

He explained this to his old friend, the French physician, who
immediately went off into ecstatic exclamations of joy as, "Good!
Great! Grand!" and "I shall now repay my good child! my dear son! for
his so excellent skill!"

The terms of the engagement were soon arranged, and Traverse prepared
to accompany his new friend to his "beautiful retreat," the private
madhouse. But Traverse wrote to his mother and to Clara in Virginia,
and also to Herbert Greyson in Mexico, to apprise them of his good
fortune.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE MYSTERIOUS MANIAC.

    Stay, jailer, stay, and hear my woe;
    She is not mad, who kneels to thee,
    For what I am, full well I know,
    And what I was, and what should be;
    I'll rave no more in proud despair--
    My language shall be calm tho' sad;
    But yet I'll truly, firmly swear,
    I am not mad! no, no, not mad!

                          --M. G. Lewis.


It was at the close of a beautiful day in early spring that Traverse
Rocke, accompanying the old doctor and the old sister, reached the
grove on the borders of the beautiful lake upon the banks of which was
situated the "Calm Retreat."

A large, low, white building surrounded with piazzas and shaded by
fragrant and flowering southern trees, it looked like the luxurious
country seat of some wealthy merchant or planter rather than a prison
for the insane.

Doctor St. Jean conducted his young assistant into a broad and cool
hall on each side of which doors opened into spacious rooms, occupied
by the proprietor and his household. The cells of the patients, as it
appeared were up-stairs. The country doctor and the matron who had been
in charge during the absence of the proprietor and his sister now came
forward to welcome the party and report the state of the institution
and its inmates.

All were as usual, the country doctor said, except "Mademoiselle."

"And what of her--how is Mademoiselle----?"

"A patient most interesting, Doctor Rocke," said the old Frenchman,
alternately questioning his substitute and addressing Traverse.

"She has stopped her violent ravings, and seems to me to be sinking
into a state of stupid despair," replied the substitute.

"A patient most interesting, my young friend! A history most pathetic!
You shall hear of it some time. But come into the parlor, and you,
Angele, my sister, ring and order coffee," said the old Frenchman,
leading the way into a pleasant apartment on the right of the hall,
furnished with straw matting upon the floor and bamboo settees and
chairs around the walls.

Here coffee was presently served to the travelers, who soon after
retired for the night.

Traverse's room was a large, pleasant apartment at the end of a wide,
long hall, on each side of which were the doors opening into the cells
of the patients.

Fatigued by his journey, Traverse slept soundly through the night; but
early in the morning he was rudely awakened by the sounds of maniac
voices from the cells. Some were crying, some laughing aloud some
groaning and howling and some holding forth in fancied exhortations.

He dressed himself quickly and left his room to walk down the length of
the long hall and observe the cells on each side. The doors were at
regular intervals, and each door had in its center a small opening to
enable the proprietor to look in upon the patients.

As these were all women, and some of them delicate and refined even in
their insanity, Traverse felt shocked at this necessary, if it were
necessary, exposure of their sanctuary.

The cells were, in fact, small bedrooms that with their white-washed
walls and white-curtained beds and windows looked excessively neat,
clean and cool, but also, it must be confessed, very bare, dreary and
cheerless.

"Even a looking-glass would be a great benefit to those poor girls, for
I remember that even Clara, in her violent grief, and mother in her
lifelong sorrow, never neglected their looking-glass and personal
appearance," said Traverse to himself, as he passed down the hall and
resolved that this little indulgence should be afforded the patients.

And except those first involuntary glances he scrupulously avoided
looking in through the gratings upon those helpless women who had no
means of secluding themselves.

But as he turned to go down the stairs his eyes went full into an
opposite cell and fell upon a vision of beauty and sorrow that
immediately riveted his gaze.

It was a small and graceful female figure, clothed in deep black,
seated by the window, with her elbow resting upon the sill and her chin
supported on her hand. Her eyes were cast down until her eyelashes lay
like inky lines upon her snow-white cheek. Her face, of classic
regularity and marble whiteness, bore a ghastly contrast to the long
eyelashes, arched eyebrows and silken ringlets black as midnight. She
might have been a statue or a picture, so motionless she sat.

Conscious of the wrong of gazing upon this solitary woman, Traverse
forced his looks away and passed on down-stairs, where he again met the
old doctor and Mademoiselle Angele at breakfast.

After breakfast Doctor St. Jean invited his young assistant to
accompany him on a round of visits to the patients, and they went
immediately up to the hall, at the end of which Traverse had slept.

"There are our incurables, but they are not violent; incurables never
are! Poor Mademoiselle! She has just been conveyed to this ward," said
the doctor, opening the door of the first cell on the right at the head
of the stairs and admitting Traverse at once into the presence of the
beautiful, black-haired, snow-faced woman, who had so much interested
him.

"This is my friend, Doctor Rocke, Mademoiselle; Doctor, this is my
friend, Mademoiselle Mont de St. Pierre!"

Traverse bowed profoundly, and the lady arose, curtsied and resumed her
seat, saying, coldly:

"I have told you, Monsieur, never to address me as Mademoiselle; you
persist in doing so, and I shall never notice the insult again."

"Ten thousand pardons, madame! But if madame will always look so young,
so beautiful, can I ever remember that she is a widow?"

The classic lip of the woman curled in scorn, and she disdained a
reply.

"I take an appeal to Monsieur Le Docteur--is not madame young and
beautiful?" asked the Frenchman, turning to Traverse, while the
splendid, black eyes of the stranger passed from the one to the other.

Traverse caught the glance of the lady and bowed gravely. It was the
most delicate and proper reply.

She smiled almost as gravely, and with a much kinder expression than
any she had bestowed upon the Frenchman.

"And how has madame fared during my absence so long? The servants--have
they been respectful? Have they been observant? Have they been obedient
to the will of madame? Madame has but to speak!" said the doctor,
bowing politely.

"Why should I speak when every word I utter you believe, or affect to
believe, to be the ravings of a maniac? I will speak no more," said the
lady, turning away her superb dark eyes and looking out of the window.

"Ah, madame will not so punish her friend, her servant, her slave!"

A gesture of fierce impatience and disgust was the only reply deigned
by the lady.

"Come away; she is angry and may become dangerously excited," said the
old doctor, leading the way from the cell.

"Did you tell me this lady is one of the incurables?" inquired
Traverse, when they had left her apartment.

"Bah! yes, poor girl, vera incurable, as my sister would say."

"Yet she appears to me to be perfectly sane, as well as exceedingly
beautiful and interesting."

"Ah, bah; my excellent, my admirable, my inexperienced young friend,
that is all you know of lunatics! With more or less violence of
assertion, they every one insist upon their sanity, just as criminals
protest their innocence. Ah, bah! you shall go into every cell in this
ward and find not one lunatic among them," sneered the old doctor, as
he led the way into the next little room.

It was indeed as he had foretold, and Traverse Rocke found himself
deeply affected by the melancholy, the earnest and sometimes the
violent manner in which the poor unfortunates protested their sanity
and implored or demanded to be restored to home and friends.

"You perceive," said the doctor, with a dry laugh, "that they are none
of them crazy?"

"I see," said Traverse, "but I also detect a very great difference
between that lovely woman in the south cell and these other inmates."

"Bah! bah! bah! She is more beautiful, more accomplished, more refined
than the others, and she is in one of her lucid intervals! That is all;
but as to a difference between her insanity and that of the other
patients, it lies in this, that she is the most hopelessly mad of the
whole lot! She has been mad eighteen years!"

"Is it possible?" exclaimed Traverse, incredulously.

"She lost her reason at the age of sixteen, and she is now thirty-four;
you can calculate!"

"It is amazing and very sorrowful! How beautiful she is!"

"Yes; her beauty was a fatal gift. It is a sad story. Ah, it is a sad
story. You shall hear it when we get through."

"I can connect no idea of woman's frailty with that refined and
intellectual face," said Traverse coldly.

"Ah, bah! you are young! you know not the world! you, my innocent, my
pious young friend!" said the old doctor, as they crossed the hall to
go into the next wing of the building, in which were situated the men's
wards.

Traverse found nothing that particularly interested him in this
department, and when they had concluded their round of visits and were
seated together in the old doctor's study, Traverse asked him for the
story of his beautiful patient.

The doctor shrugged his shoulders.

"It is a story miserable, as I told you before. A gentleman, illustrious,
from Virginia, an officer high in the army, and distinguished in the
war, he brought this woman to me nearly three years ago. He informed me
that--oh, bien! I had better tell you the story in my own manner. This
young lady, Mademoiselle Mont de St. Pierre, is of a family noble and
distinguished--a relative of this officer, illustrious and brave. At
fifteen Mademoiselle met a man, handsome and without honor. Ah, bah!
you understand! at sixteen the child became a fallen angel! She lost
her reason through sorrow and shame. This relative--this gentleman,
illustrious and noble, tender and compassionate--took her to the seclusion
of his country house, where she lived in elegance, luxury and honor.
But as the years passed her malady increased; her presence became
dangerous; in a word, the gentleman, distinguished and noble, saw the
advertisement of my 'Calm Retreat,' my institution incomparable, and he
wrote to me. In a word, he liked my terms and brought to me his young
relative, so lovely and so unfortunate. Ah! he is a good man, this
officer, so gallant, so chivalrous; but she is ungrateful!"

"Ungrateful!"

"Ah, bah! yes; it is the way of lunatics! They ever imagine their best
friends to be their worst enemies. The poor, crazed creature fancies
that she is the sister-in-law of this officer illustrious! She thinks
that she is the widow of his elder brother, whom she imagines he
murdered, and that she is the mother of children, whom she says he has
abducted or destroyed, so that he may enjoy the estate that is her
widow's dower and their orphans' patrimony. That is the reason why she
insists on being called madame instead of mademoiselle, and we indulge
her when we think of it!"

"But all this is very singular!"

"Ah, bah! who can account for a lunatic's fancies? She is the maddest
of the whole lot. Sometimes she used to become so violent that we would
have to restrain her. But lately, Doctor Wood tells me, she is quite
still; that we consider a bad sign; there is always hope for a lunatic
until they begin to sink into this state," said the doctor, with an air
of competency.




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE MANIAC'S STORY.

    A scheming villain forged the tale
      That chains me in this dreary cell,
    My fate unknown, my friends bewail,
      Oh, doctor, haste that fate to tell!
    Oh, haste my daughter's heart to cheer,
      Her heart, at once, 'twill grieve and glad
    To know, tho' chained and captive here,
      I am not mad! I am not mad!

                          --M. G. Lewis.


There is some advantage in having imagination, since that visionary
faculty opens the mental eyes to facts that more practical and duller
intellects could never see.

Traverse was young and romantic, and deeply interested in the doctor's
beautiful patient. He, therefore, did not yield his full credulity to
the tale told by the "relative illustrious" to the old doctor, as to
the history and cause of the lady's madness, or even take it for
granted that she was mad. He thought it quite possible that the
distinguished officer's story might be a wicked fabrication, to conceal
a crime, and that the lady's "crazy fancy" might be the pure truth.

And Traverse had heard to what heinous uses private mad-houses were
sometimes put by some unscrupulous men, who wished to get certain women
out of their way, yet who shrank from bloodshed.

And he thought it not impossible that this "gentleman so noble, so
compassionate and tender," might be just such a man, and this "fallen
angel" such a victim. And he determined to watch and observe. And he
further resolved to treat the interesting patient with all the studious
delicacy and respect due to a refined and accomplished woman in the
full possession of her faculties. If she were really mad, this demeanor
would not hurt her, and if she were not mad it was the only proper
conduct to be observed toward her, as any other must be equally cruel
and offensive. Her bodily health certainly required the attendance of a
physician, and Traverse had therefore a fair excuse for his daily
visits to her cell.

His respectful manners, his grave bow, and his reverential tone in
saying--

"I hope I find you stronger to-day, Madam," seemed to gratify one who
had few sources of pleasure.

"I thank you," she would answer, with a softened tone and look, adding,
"Yes" or "No," as the truth might be.

One day, after looking at the young physician some time, she suddenly
said:

"You never forget. You always address me by my proper title of Madam,
and without the touch of irony which others indulge in when 'humoring'
me, as they call it! Now, pray explain to me why, in sober earnest, you
give me this title?"

"Because, Madam, I have heard you lay claim to that title, and I think
that you yourself, of all the world, have the best right to know how
you should be addressed," said Traverse, respectfully.

The lady looked wistfully at him and said:

"But my next-door neighbor asserts that she is a queen; she insists
upon being called 'your majesty.' Has she, then, the best right to know
how she should be addressed?"

"Alas! no, Madam, and I am pained that you should do yourself the great
wrong to draw such comparisons."

"Why? Am not I and the 'queen' inmates of the same ward of incurables,
in the same lunatic asylum?"

"Yes, but not with equal justice of cause. The 'queen' is a hopelessly
deranged, but happy lunatic. You, Madam, are a lady who has retained
the full possession of your faculties amid circumstances and
surroundings that must have overwhelmed the reason of a weaker mind."

The lady looked at him in wonder and almost in joy.

"Ah! it was not the strength of my mind; it was the strength of the
Almighty upon whom my mind was stayed, for time and for eternity, that
has saved my reason in all these many years! But how did you know that
I was not mad? How do you know that this is anything more than a lucid
interval of longer duration than usual?" she asked.

"Madam, you will forgive me for having looked at you so closely, and
watched you so constantly, but I am your physician, you know----"

"I have nothing to forgive and much to thank you for, young man. You
have an honest, truthful, frank, young face! the only one such that I
have seen in eighteen years of sorrow! But why, then, did you not
believe the doctor? Why did you not take the fact of my insanity upon
trust, as others did?" she asked, fixing her glorious, dark eyes
inquiringly upon his face.

"Madam, from the first moment in which I saw you, I disbelieved the
story of your insanity, and mentioned my doubts to Doctor St. Jean----"

"Who ridiculed your doubts, of course. I can readily believe that he
did. Doctor St. Jean is not a very bad man, but he is a charlatan and a
dullard; he received the story of my reported insanity as he received
me, as an advantage to his institution, and he never gave himself the
unprofitable trouble to investigate the circumstances. I told him the
truth about myself as calmly as I now speak to you, but somebody else
had told him that this truth was the fiction of a deranged imagination,
and he found it more convenient and profitable to believe somebody
else. But again I ask you, why were not you, also, so discreetly
obtuse?"

"Madam," said Traverse, blushing ingenuously, "I hope you will forgive
me for saying that it is impossible any one could see you without
becoming deeply interested in your fate. Your face, Madam, speaks
equally of profound sorrows and of saintly resignation. I saw no sign
of madness there. In the calm depths of those sad eyes, lady, I knew
that the fires of insanity never could have burned. Pardon me that I
looked at you so closely; I was your physician, and was most deeply
anxious concerning my patient."

"I thank you; may the Lord bless you! Perhaps he has sent you here for
my relief, for you are right, young friend--you are altogether right; I
have been wild with grief, frantic with despair, but never for one hour
in the whole course of my life have I been insane."

"I believe you, Madam, on my sacred honor I do!" said Traverse,
fervently.

"And yet you could get no one about this place to believe you! They
have taken my brother-in-law's false story, indorsed as it is by the
doctor-proprietor, for granted. And just so long as I persist in
telling my true story, they will consider me a monomaniac, and so often
as the thought of my many wrongs and sorrows combines with the nervous
irritability to which every woman is occasionally subject, and makes me
rave with impatience and excitement, they will report me a dangerous
lunatic, subject to periodical attacks of violent frenzy; but, young
man, even at my worst, I am no more mad than any other woman, wild with
grief and hysterical through nervous irritation, might at any time
become without having her sanity called in question."

"I am sure that you are not, nor ever could have been, Madam. The
nervous excitement of which you speak is entirely within the control of
medicine, which mania proper is not. You will use the means that I
prescribe and your continued calmness will go far to convince even
these dullards that they have been wrong."

"I will do everything you recommend; indeed, for some weeks before you
came, I had put a constraint upon myself and forced myself to be very
still; but the effect of that was, that acting upon their theory they
said that I was sinking into the last or 'melancholy-mad' state of
mania, and they put me in here with the incurables."

"Lady," said Traverse, respectfully taking her hand, "now that I am
acquainted in some slight degree with the story of your heavy wrongs,
do not suppose that I will ever leave you until I see you restored to
your friends."

"Friends! ah, young man, do you really suppose that if I had had
friends I should have been left thus long unsought? I have no friends,
Doctor Rocke, except yourself, newly sent me by the Lord; nor any
relatives except a young daughter whom I have seen but twice in my
life!--once upon the dreadful night when she was born and torn away
from my sight and once about two years ago, when she must have been
sixteen years of age. My little daughter does not know that she has a
poor mother living, and I have no friend upon earth but you, whom the
Lord has sent."

"And not in vain!" said Traverse, fervently, "though you have no other
friends, yet you have the law to protect you. I will make your case
known and restore you to liberty. Then, lady, listen: I have a good
mother, to whom suffering has taught sympathy with the unfortunate, and
I have a lovely betrothed bride, whom you will forgive her lover for
thinking an angel in woman's form; and we have a beautiful home among
the hills of Virginia, and you shall add to our happiness by living
with us."

The lady looked at Traverse Rocke with astonishment and incredulity.

"Boy," she said, "do you know what you are promising--to assume the
whole burthen of the support of a useless woman for her whole life?
What would your mother or your promised wife say to such a
proposition?"

"Ah! you do not know my dear mother nor my Clara--no, nor even me. I
tell you the truth when I say that your coming among us would make us
happier. Oh, Madam, I myself owe so much to the Lord and to His
instruments, the benevolent of this world, for all that has been done
for me. I seize with gratitude the chance to serve in my turn any of
His suffering children. Pray believe me!"

"I do! I do, Doctor Rocke! I see that life has not deprived you of a
generous, youthful enthusiasm," said the lady, with the tears welling
up into her glorious black eyes.

After a little, with a smile, she held out her hand to him, saying:

"Young friend, if you should succeed in freeing me from this prison and
establishing my sanity before a court of justice, I and my daughter
will come into the immediate possession of one of the largest estates
in your native Virginia! Sit you down, Doctor Rocke, while I tell you
my true story, and much, very much more of it than I have ever confided
to any human being."

"Lady, I am very impatient to hear your history, but I am your
physician, and must first consider your health. You have been
sufficiently excited for one day; it is late; take your tea and retire
early to bed. To-morrow morning, after I have visited the wards and you
have taken your breakfast, I will come, and you shall tell me the story
of your life."

"I will do whatever you think best," said the lady.

Traverse lifted her hand to his lips, bowed, and retreated from the
cell.

That same night Traverse wrote to his friend, Herbert Greyson, in
Mexico, and to his mother and Clara, describing his interesting
patient, though as yet he could tell but little of her, not even in
fact her real name, but promising fuller particulars next time, and
declaring his intention of bringing her home for the present to their
house.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

END OF THE LADY'S STORY.

    Of the present naught is bright,
    But in the coming years I see
    A brilliant and a cheerful light,
    Which burns before thee constantly.

                          --W. D. Gallagher.


At the appointed hour the next morning Traverse Rocke repaired to the
cell of his mysterious patient.

He was pleased to find her up, dressed with more than usual care and
taste and looking, upon the whole, much better in health and spirits
than upon the preceding day.

"Ah, my young hero, it is you; you see that I am ready for you," she
said, holding out her hand.

"You are looking very well this morning," said Traverse, smiling.

"Yes, hope is a fine tonic, Doctor Rocke."

She was seated by the same window at which Traverse had first seen her,
and she now beckoned the young doctor to come and take a seat near her.

"My story is almost as melodramatic as a modern romance, Doctor Rocke,"
she said.

Traverse bowed gravely and waited.

"My father was a French patriot, who suffered death in the cause of
liberty when I, his only child, was but fourteen years of age. My
mother, broken-hearted by his loss, followed him within a few months. I
was left an orphan and penniless, for our estate was confiscated."

"Ah, your sorrows came early and heavily indeed," said Traverse.

"Yes; well, a former servant of my father held an humble situation of
porter on the ground floor of a house, the several floors of which were
let out to different lodgers. This poor man and his wife gave me a
temporary home with themselves. Among the lodgers of the house there
was a young Virginian gentleman of fortune, traveling for pleasure and
improvement; his name was Mr. Eugene Le Noir."

"Le Noir!" cried Traverse, with a violent start.

"Yes--what is the matter?"

"It is a familiar Virginia name, Madam, that is all; pray go on."

"Mr. Le Noir was as good and kind as he was wise and cultivated. He
used to stop to gossip with old Cliquot every time he stopped at the
porter's room to take or to leave his key. There he heard of the poor
little orphan of the guillotine, who had no friend in the world but her
father's old servant. He pitied me, and after many consultations with
Father and Mother Cliquot, he assumed the position of guardian to me,
and placed me at one of the best schools in Paris. He lingered in the
city and came to see me very often; but always saw me in the presence
of Madame, the directress. I clung to him with affection as to a father
or an elder brother, and I knew he loved me with the tender, protecting
affection that he would have given a younger sister, had he possessed
one. Ah! Doctor Rocke, tell me, besides yourself, are there many other
men in your State like him?"

"I knew but one such; but go on, dear Madam."

"When I had been to school some months he came to me one day scarcely
able to conceal his woe. He told me that his father was ill and that he
should have to sail in the first packet from Havre, and that, in fact,
he had then come to take leave of me. I was wild with grief, not only
upon his account but upon my own, at the prospect of losing him, my
only friend. I was but a child, and a French child to boot. I knew
nothing of the world; I regarded this noble gentleman, who was so much
my superior in years as in everything else, as a father, guardian or
elder brother; so in an agony of grief I threw myself into his arms,
sobbing and weeping bitterly and imploring him not to break my heart by
leaving me. It was in vain Madame the Directress exclaimed and
expostulated at these improprieties. I am sure I did not hear a word
until he spoke. Putting me out of his arms, he said:

"'I must go, my child; duty calls me.'

"'Then take me with you; take your poor little one with you, and do not
pull her out of your warm, good heart, or she will wither and die like
a flower torn up by the roots!' I cried, between my sobs and tears.

"He drew me back to his bosom and whispered:

"There is but one way in which I can take you with me, my child. Will
you be my wife, little Capitolie?"

"Capitola!" cried Traverse, with another great start.

"Yes! Why? What is the matter now?"

"Why, it is such an odd name, that is all! Pray proceed, Madam."

"We were married the same day, and sailed the third morning thereafter
from Havre for the United States, where we arrived, alas! only to find
the noble gentleman, my Eugene's father, laid in his grave. After Mr.
Le Noir's natural grief was over we settled down peaceably to our
country life at the Hidden House----"

"The Hidden House!" again exclaimed Traverse Rocke.

"Yes! that is another odd name, isn't it? Well, I was very happy. At
first when I understood my real position, I had been afraid that my
husband had married me only from compassion; but he soon proved to me
that his love was as high, as pure and as noble as himself. I was very
happy. But one day, in the midst of my exultant joy, a thunderbolt fell
and shattered my peace to destruction forever! Oh, Doctor Rocke, my
husband was murdered by some unknown hand in his own woods, in open
day! I cannot talk of this!" cried the widow, breaking down,
overwhelmed with the rush of terrible recollections.

Traverse poured out a glass of water and handed it to her.

She drank it, made an effort at self-control, and resumed:

"Thus, scarcely sixteen years of age, I was a widow, helpless,
penniless and entirely dependent upon my brother-in-law, Colonel
Gabriel Le Noir, for by the terms of their father's will, if Eugene
died without issue the whole property descended to his younger brother,
Gabriel. To speak the truth, Colonel Le Noir was exceedingly kind to me
after my awful bereavement, until a circumstance was discovered that
changed all our relations. It was two months after my husband's death
that I discovered, with mingled emotions of joy and sorrow, that heaven
had certainly destined me to become a mother! I kept my cherished
secret to myself as long as it was possible, but it could not indeed be
long concealed from the household. I believe that my brother-in-law was
the first to suspect it. He called me into his study one day, and I
obeyed like a child. And there he rudely questioned me upon the subject
of my sacred mother-mystery. He learned the truth more from my silence
than from my replies, for I could not answer him."

"The brute! the miserable hound!" ejaculated Traverse.

"Oh, Doctor Rocke, I could not tell you the avalanche of abuse, insult
and invective that he hurled upon my defenseless head. He accused me of
more crimes than I had ever heard talk of. He told me that my condition
was an impossible one unless I had been false to the memory of his
brother; that I had dishonored his name, disgraced his house and
brought myself to shame; that I should leave the roof, leave the
neighborhood and die as I deserved to die, in a ditch! I made no reply.
I was crushed into silence under the weight of his reproaches."

"The caitiff! The poltroon! Ah, poor stranger, why did you not leave
the house at once and throw yourself upon the protection of the
minister of your parish or some other kind neighbor?"

"Alas! I was a child, a widow and a foreigner all in one! I did not
know your land or your laws or your people. I was not hopeful or
confident; I had suffered so cruelly and I was overwhelmed by his
abuse."

"But did you not know, dear lady, that all his rage was aroused only by
the fact that the birth of your child would disinherit him?"

"Ah, no! I was not aware, at that time, that Gabriel Le Noir was a
villain. I thought his anger honest, though unjust, and I was as
ignorant as a child. I had no mother nor matronly friend to instruct
me. I knew that I had broken no command of God or man; that I had been
a faithful wife, but when Gabriel Le Noir accused me with such bitter
earnestness I feared that some strange departure from the usual course
of nature had occurred for my destruction. And I was overwhelmed by
mortification, terror and despair!"

"Ah, the villain!" exclaimed Traverse, between his teeth.

"He told me at last that to save the memory of his dead brother he
would hide my dishonor, and he ordered me to seclude myself from the
sight of all persons. I obeyed him like a slave, grateful even for the
shelter of his roof."

"A roof that was your own, as he very well knew. And he knew, also, the
caitiff! that if the circumstance became known the whole State would
have protected you in your rights, and ejected him like a cur."

"Nay, even in that case no harm should have reached him on my account.
He was my husband's brother."

"And worst enemy! But proceed, dear lady."

"Well, I secluded myself as he commanded. For four months I never left
the attic to which he had ordered me to retreat. At the end of that
time I became the mother of twins--a boy and a girl. The boy only
opened his eyes on this world to close them again directly. The girl
was living and healthy. The old nurse who attended me had an honest and
compassionate face; I persuaded her to secrete and save the living
child, and to present the dead babe to Colonel Le Noir as the only one,
for the suspicions that had never been awakened for myself were alarmed
for my child. I instinctively felt that he would have destroyed it."

"The mother's instinct is like inspiration," said Traverse.

"It may be so. Well, the old woman pitied me and did as I desired. She
took the dead child to Colonel Le Noir, who carried it off, and
afterward buried it as the sole heir of his elder brother. The old
woman carried off my living child and my wedding ring, concealed under
her ample shawl. Anxiety for the fate of my child caused me to do what
nothing else on earth would have tempted me to do--to creep about the
halls and passages on tiptoe and under cover of the night and listen at
keyholes," said the lady, blushing deeply at the recollection.

"You--you were perfectly right, Mrs. Le Noir! In a den of robbers,
where your life and honor were always at stake, you could have done no
otherwise!" exclaimed Traverse, warmly.

"I learned by this means that my poor old nurse had paid with her
liberty for her kindness to me. She had been abducted and forced from
her native country together with a child found in her possession, which
they evidently suspected, and I knew, to be mine. Oh, heaven! the agony
then of thinking of what might be her unknown fate, worse than death,
perhaps! I felt that I had only succeeded in saving her life--doubtful
good!"

Here Mrs. Le Noir paused in thought for a few moments and then resumed.

"It is the memory of a long, dreary and hopeless imprisonment, my
recollection of my residence in that house! In the same manner in which
I gained all my information, I learned that it was reported in the
neighborhood that I had gone mad with grief for the loss of my husband
and that I was an inmate of a madhouse in the North! It was altogether
false; I never left the Hidden House in all those years until about two
years ago. My life there was dreary beyond all conception. I was
forbidden to go out or to appear at a window. I had the whole attic,
containing some eight or ten rooms, to rove over, but I was forbidden
to descend. An ill-looking woman called Dorcas Knight, between whom and
the elder Le Noir there seemed to have been some sinful bond was
engaged ostensibly as my attendant, but really as my jailer.
Nevertheless, when the sense of confinement grew intolerable I
sometimes eluded her vigilance and wandered about the house at night."

"Thence, no doubt," said Traverse, "giving rise to the report that the
house was haunted."

Mrs. Le Noir smiled, saying:

"I believe the Le Noirs secretly encouraged that report. I'll tell you
why. They gave me a chamber lamp inclosed in an intense blue shade,
that cast a strange, unearthly light around. Their ostensible reason
was to insure my safety from fire. Their real reason was that this
light might be seen from without in what was reputed to be an
uninhabited portion of the house, and give color to its bad reputation
among the ignorant of being haunted."

"So much for the origin of one authenticated ghost story," said
Traverse.

"Yes, and there was still more circumstantial evidence to support this
ghostly reputation of the house. As the years passed I had, even in my
confined state, gathered knowledge in one way and another--picking up
stray books and hearing stray conversation; and so, in the end I
learned how gross a deception and how great a wrong had been practised
upon me. I was not wise or cunning. I betrayed constantly to my
attendant my knowledge of these things. In consequence of which my
confinement became still more restricted."

"Yes, they were afraid of you, and fear is always the mother of
cruelty," said Traverse.

"Well, from the time that I became enlightened as to my real position,
all my faculties were upon the alert to find means of escaping and
making my condition known to the authorities. One night they had a
guest, Colonel Eglen, of the army, Old Dorcas had her hands full, and
forgot her prisoner. My door was left unlocked. So, long after Colonel
Eglen had retired to rest, and when all the household were buried in
repose, I left my attic and crept down to the chamber of the guest,
with no other purpose than to make known my wrongs and appeal to his
compassion. I entered his chamber, approached his bed to speak to him,
when this hero of a hundred fields started up in a panic, and at the
sight of the pale woman who drew his curtains in the dead of the night,
he shrieked, violently rang his bell and fainted prone away."

"Ha! ha! ha! he could brave an army or march into a cannon's mouth
easier than meet a supposed denizen of another world! Well, Doctor
Johnson believed in ghosts," laughed Traverse.

"It remained for me to retreat as fast as possible to my room to avoid
the Le Noirs, who were hurrying with headlong speed to the
guest-chamber. They knew of course, that I was the ghost, although they
affected to treat their visitor's story as a dream. After that my
confinement was so strict that for years I had no opportunity of
leaving my attic. At last the strict espionage was relaxed. Sometimes
my door would be left unlocked. Upon one such occasion, in creeping
about in the dark, I learned, by overhearing a conversation between Le
Noir and his housekeeper, that my long lost daughter, Capitola, had
been found and was living at Hurricane Hall! This was enough to comfort
me for years. About three years ago the surveillance over me was so
modified that I was left again to roam about the upper rooms of the
house at will, until I learned that they had a new inmate, young Clara
Day, a ward of Le Noir! Oh, how I longed to warn that child to fly! But
I could not; alas, again I was restricted to my own room, lest I should
be seen by her. But again, upon one occasion, old Dorcas forgot to lock
my door at night. I stole forth from my room and learned that a young
girl, caught out in the storm, was to stay all night at the Hidden
House. Young girls were not plentiful in that neighborhood, I knew.
Besides, some secret instinct told me that this was my daughter: I knew
that she would sleep in the chamber under mine, because that was the
only habitable guest-room in the whole house. In the dead of night I
left my room and went below and entered the chamber of the young girl.
I went first to the toilet table to see if among her little girlish
ornaments, I could find any clue to her identity. I found it in a
plain, gold ring--the same that I had intrusted to the old nurse. Some
strange impulse caused me to slip the ring upon my finger. Then I went
to the bed and threw aside the curtains to gaze upon the sleeper. My
girl--my own girl! With what strange sensations I first looked upon her
face! Her eyes were open and fixed upon mine in a panic of terror. I
stooped to press my lips to her's and she closed her eyes in mortal
fear, I carried nothing but terror with me! I withdrew from the room
and went back, sobbing, to my chamber. My poor girl next morning
unconsciously betrayed her mother. It had nearly cost me my life."

"When the Le Noirs came home, the first night of their arrival they
entered my room, seized me in my bed and dragged me shrieking from it!"

"Good heaven! What punishment is sufficient for such wretches!"
exclaimed Traverse, starting up and pacing the narrow limits of the
cell.

"Listen! They soon stopped both my shrieks and my breath at once. I
lost consciousness for a time, and when I awoke I found myself in a
close carriage, rattling over a mountain road, through the night. Late
the next morning we reached an uninhabited country house, where I was
again imprisoned, in charge of an old dumb woman, whom Le Noir called
Mrs. Raven. This I afterwards understood to be Willow Heights, the
property of the orphan heiress, Clara Day. And here, also, for the term
of my stay, the presence of the unknown inmate got the house the
reputation of being haunted.

"The old dumb woman was a shade kinder to me than Dorcas Knight had
been, but I did not stay in her charge very long. One night the Le
Noirs came in hot haste. The young heiress had been delivered from
their charge by a degree of the Orphans' Court, and they had to give up
her house. I was drugged and hurried away. Some narcotic sedative must
have been insinuated into all my food, for I was in a state of
semi-sensibility and mild delirium during the whole course of a long
journey by land and sea, which passed to me like a dream, and at the
end of which I found myself here. No doubt, from the excessive use of
narcotics, there was some thing wild and stupid in my manner and
appearance that justified the charge of madness. And when I found that
I was a prisoner in a lunatic asylum, far, far away from the
neighborhood where at least I had once been known I gave way to the
wilder grief that further confirmed the story of my madness. I have
been here two years, occasionally giving way to outbursts of wild
despair, that the doctor calls frenzy. I was sinking into an apathy,
when one day I opened the little Bible that lay upon the table of my
cell. I fixed upon the last chapters in the gospel of John. That
narrative of meek patience and divine love. It did for me what no power
under that of God could have done. It saved me! It saved me from
madness! It saved me from despair! There is a time for the second birth
of every soul; that time had come for me. From that hour, this book has
been my constant companion and comfort. I have learned from its pages
how little it matters how or where this fleeting, mortal life is
passed, so that it answers its purpose of preparing the soul for
another. I have learned patience with sinners, forgiveness of enemies,
and confidence in God. In a word, I trust I have learned the way of
salvation, and in that have learned everything. Your coming and your
words, young friend, have stirred within my heart the desire to be
free, to mingle again on equal terms with my fellow beings, and above
all, to find and to embrace my child. But not wildly anxious am I even
for these earthly blessings. These, as well as all things else, I
desire to leave to the Lord, praying that His will may be mine. Young
friend, my story is told."

"Madam," said Traverse, after a thoughtful pause, "our fates have been
more nearly connected than you could have imagined. Those Le Noirs have
been my enemies as they are yours. That young orphan heiress, who
appealed from their cruelty to the Orphans' Court, was my own
betrothed. Willow Heights was her patrimony and is now her quiet home
where she lives with my mother, and where in their names I invited you
to come. And take this comfort also; your enemy no longer lives: months
ago I left him ill with a mortal wound. This morning the papers
announce his death. There remains, therefore, but little for me to do,
but to take legal measures to free you from this place, and restore you
to your home. Within an hour I shall set out for New Orleans, for the
purpose of taking the initiatory steps. Until my return then, dear
lady," said Traverse, respectfully taking her hand--"farewell, and be
of good cheer!"




CHAPTER XXIX.

PROSPECTS BRIGHTEN.

    Thus far our fortune keeps an onward course,
    And we are graced with wreaths of victory.

                          --Shakespeare.


Leaving Mrs. Le Noir, Traverse went down to the stable, saddled the
horse that had been allotted to his use, and set off for a long day's
journey to New Orleans, where late at night he arrived, and put up at
the St. Charles.

He slept deeply from fatigue until late the next morning, when he was
awakened by the sounds of trumpets, drums and fifes, and by general
rejoicing.

He arose and looked from his windows to ascertain the cause, and saw
the square full of people in a state of the highest excitement,
watching for a military procession coming up the street.

It was the United States troops under their gallant commanders, who had
landed from the steamboats that morning and were now marching from the
quays up to their quarters at the St. Charles.

As they advanced, Traverse, eagerly upon the lookout, recognized his
own regiment.

Traverse withdrew from the window, hurriedly completed his toilet, and
hastened down-stairs, where he soon found himself face to face with
Herbert, who warmly grasping his hand, exclaimed:

"You here, old friend? Why, I thought you were down in East Feliciana,
with your interesting patient!"

"It is for the interest of that 'interesting patient' that I am here,
Herbert! Did I tell you, she was one of the victims of that demon Le
Noir?"

"No: but I know it from another source. I know as much, or more of her,
perhaps, than you do!"

"Ah!" exclaimed Traverse, in surprise.

"Yes! I know, for instance, that she is Capitola's mother, the
long-lost widow of Eugene Le Noir, the mistress of the Hidden House,
and the ghost who drew folks' curtains there at night."

"Then you do know something about her, but how did you arrive at the
knowledge?"

"By the 'last dying speech and confession' of Gabriel Le Noir, confided
to me to be used in restitution after his decease. But, come! There is
the second bell. Our mess are going in to breakfast; join us and
afterwards you and I will retire and compare notes," said Herbert,
taking the arm of his friend as they followed the moving crowd into the
breakfast parlor.

After the morning meal was concluded the friends withdrew together to
the chamber occupied by Traverse Rocke, where they sat down for mutual
explanations.

Herbert first related to Traverse all that had occurred from the time
that the latter left the city of Mexico, including the arrival of
Craven Le Noir at the dying bed of his father, the subsequent death and
funeral of Colonel Le Noir, and the late emigration of Craven, who to
avoid the shame of the approaching revelation, joined a party of
explorers bound for the recently discovered gold mines in California.

"The civilized world is then rid of two villains at once," said the
uncompromising Traverse.

Herbert took from his pocket the confession of Colonel Le Noir, which
he said he was now at liberty to use as he thought proper for the ends
of justice. That certain parts of the disclosure intimately concerned
Traverse Rocke, to whom he should therefore read the whole. The
confession may be briefly summed up as follows:

The first item was that he had sought to win the affections of Marah
Rocke, the supposed wife of Major Ira Warfield; he had sedulously
waylaid and followed her with his suit during the whole summer; she had
constantly repulsed and avoided him; he, listening to his own evil
passions, had bribed her maid to admit him in the dark to Marah's
cabin, upon a certain night when her husband was to be absent; that the
unexpected return of Major Warfield, who had tracked him to the house,
had prevented the success of his evil purpose, but had not saved the
reputation of the innocent wife, whose infuriated husband would not
believe her ignorant of the presence of the villain in her house; that
he, Gabriel Le Noir, in hatred as well as in shame, had forborne until
now to make the explanation, which he hoped might now, late in life as
it was, bring the long-severed pair together, and establish Marah Rocke
and her son in their legal and social rights.

The second item in the black list of crime was the death of his elder
brother, whom he declared he had not intended to kill. He said that,
having contracted large debts which he was unable to pay he had
returned secretly from his distant quarters to demand the money from
his brother, who had often helped him; that, meeting his brother in the
woods, he made this request. Eugene reproached him for his extravagance
and folly, and refused to aid him; an encounter ensued, in which Eugene
fell. He, Gabriel Le Noir, fled pursued by the curse of Cain, and
reached his own quarters before even his absence had been suspected.
His agency in the death of his brother was not suspected even by his
accomplice in other crimes, the outlaw called Black Donald, who,
thinking to gain an ascendency over one whom he called his patron,
actually pretended to have made way with Eugene Le Noir for the sake of
his younger brother.

The third item of confession was the abduction of the nurse and babe of
the young widow of Eugene, the circumstances of which are already known
to the reader.

The fourth in the dreadful list comprised the deceptions, wrongs and
persecutions practised upon Madame Eugene Le Noir, and the final false
imprisonment of that lady under the charge of insanity, in the private
madhouse kept by Doctor Pierre St. Jean, in East Feliciana.

In conclusion, he spoke of the wrongs done to Clara Day, whose pardon,
with that of others, he begged. And he prayed that in consideration of
his son, as little publicity as was possible might be given to these
crimes.

During the reading of this confession, the eyes of Traverse Rocke were
fixed in wonder and half incredulity upon the face of Herbert, and at
its conclusion he said:

"What a mass of crime! But that we may not dare to question the mercy
of the Lord, I should ask if these were sins that he would ever pardon!
Herbert, it appalls me to think of it!"

Then, after deep thought, he added:

"This, then, was the secret of my dear mother's long unhappiness. She
was Major Warfield's forsaken wife. Herbert, I feel as though I never,
never could forgive my father!"

"Traverse, if Major Warfield had wilfully and wantonly forsaken your
mother, I should say that your resentment was natural and right. Who
should be an honorable woman's champion if not her own son? But Major
Warfield, as well as his wife, was more sinned against than sinning.
Your parents were both victims of a cruel conspiracy, and he suffered
as much in his way as she did in hers," said Herbert.

"I always thought, somehow, that my dear mother was a forsaken wife.
She never told me so, but there was something about her circumstances
and manners, her retired life, her condition, so much below her
deserts, her never speaking of her husband's death, which would have
been natural for her to do, had she been a widow--all, somehow, went to
give me the impression that my father had abandoned us. Lately I had
suspected Major Warfield had something to do with the sad affair,
though I never once suspected him to be my father. So much for natural
instincts," said Traverse, with a melancholy smile.

"Traverse," said Herbert, with the design of drawing him off from sad
remembrances of his mother's early trials. "Traverse, this confession,
signed and witnessed as it is, will wonderfully simplify your course of
action in regard to the deliverance of Madame Le Noir."

"Yes; so it will," said Traverse, with animation. "There will be no
need now of applying to law, especially if you will come down with me
to East Feliciana and bring the confession with you."

"I will set out with you this very morning, if you wish, as I am on
leave. What! To hasten to the release of Capitola's mother, I would set
out at midnight and ride straight on for a week!"

"Ah! there is no need of such extravagant feats of travel. It is now
ten o'clock; if we start within an hour we can reach the 'Calm Retreat'
by eleven o'clock to-night."

"En avant, then," exclaimed Herbert, rising and ringing the bell.

Traverse ordered horses, and in twenty minutes the friends were on the
road to East Feliciana.

They reached the "Calm Retreat" so late that night that there was none
but the porter awake to admit them.

Traverse took his friend up to his own dormitory, saying, laughingly:

"It is an unappreciable distance of time since you and I occupied the
same bed, Herbert."

"Yes; but it is not the first, by five hundred times. Do you remember,
Traverse, the low attic where we used to sleep, and how on stormy
nights we used to listen to the rain pattering on the roof, within two
or three inches of our faces, and how we used to be half afraid to turn
over for fear that we should bump our heads against the timbers of the
ceiling?"

"Yes, indeed," said Traverse.

And thereupon the two friends launched into a discussion of old times,
when the two widows and their sons lived together--the two women
occupying one bed, and the two boys the other. And this discussion they
kept up until long after they retired, and until sleep overtook them.

The next morning Traverse conducted his friend down to the breakfast
parlor, to introduce him to Doctor St. Jean, who, as soon as he
perceived his young medical assistant, sprang forward exclaiming:

"Grand ciel! Is this then you? Have you then returned? What for did you
run away with my horse?"

"I went to New Orleans in great haste, upon very important business,
sir."

"Grand Dieu! I should think so, when you ride off on my horse without
saying a word. If it had been my ambling pony I should have been in
despair, I! Your business so hasty and so important was accomplished, I
hope."

"Yes; I did my errand with less trouble than I had anticipated, owing
to the happy circumstance of meeting my friend here, who has come down
hither connected with the same business."

"Ah! vera happy to see your friend. In the medical profession, I
suppose?"

"No, sir; in the army. Allow me to present him. Major Herbert Greyson,
of the --th Regiment of Cavalry."

"Ou! ay! Grand ciel! This is the brave, the distinguished, the
illustrious officer, so honorably mentioned in the dispatches of the
invincible Taylor and the mighty Scott!" said the little Frenchman,
bowing his night-capped head down to his slippery toes.

Herbert smiled as he returned the bow. And then the little French
doctor, turning to Traverse said:

"But your business, so important and so hasty, which has brought this
officer so illustrious down here--what is it, my friend?"

"We will have the honor of explaining to Monsieur le Docteur, over our
coffee, if he will oblige us by ordering the servant to retire," said
Traverse, who sometimes adopted, in speaking to the old Frenchman, his
own formal style of politeness. "Go, then, John!"

"Oui, oui, certainement! Allez donc, John!"

As soon as the man had gone, Traverse said:

"I propose to discuss this business over our coffee, because it will
save time without interfering with our morning meal, and I know that
immediately afterwards you will go your usual round of visits to your
patients."

"Eh bien! proceed, my son! proceed!"

Traverse immediately commenced and related all that was necessary
concerning the fraud practised upon the institution by introducing into
it an unfortunate woman, represented to be mad, but really only
sorrowful, nervous and excitable. And to prove the truth of his words,
Traverse desired Herbert to read from the confession the portion
relating to this fraud, and to show the doctor the signature of the
principal and the witness.

To have seen the old French doctor then! I rejoice in a Frenchman, for
the frank abandon with which he gives himself up to his emotions! Our
doctor, after staring at the confession, took hold of the top of his
blue tasseled night-cap, pulled it off his head and threw it violently
upon the floor! Then remembering that he was exposing a cranium as bald
as a peeled potato, he suddenly caught it up again, clapped it upon his
crown and exclaimed:

"Sacre! Diable!" and other ejaculations dreadful to translate, and
others again which it would be profane to set down in French or
English.

Gabriel Le Noir was no longer an officer illustrious, a gentleman noble
and distinguished, compassionate and tender; he was a robber infamous!
a villain atrocious, a caitiff ruth, and without remorse!

After breakfast the doctor consented that his young hero, his little
knight-errant, his dear son, should go to the distressed lady and open
the good news to her, while the great Major Greyson, the warrior
invincible, should go around with himself to inspect the institution.

Traverse immediately repaired to the chamber of Mrs. Le Noir, whom he
found sitting at the window, engaged in some little trifle of
needlework, the same pale, patient woman that she had first appeared to
him.

"Ah, you have come! I read good news upon your smiling face, my friend!
Tell it! I have borne the worst of sorrows! Shall I not have strength
to bear joy?"

Traverse told her all, and then ended by saying:

"Now, dear madame, it is necessary that we leave this place within two
hours, as Major Greyson's regiment leaves New Orleans for Washington
to-morrow, and it is advisable that you go under our protection. We can
get you a female attendant from the St. Charles."

"Oh, I can be ready in ten minutes! Bless you, I have no fine lady's
wardrobe to pack up!" replied Mrs. Le Noir, with a smile.

Traverse bowed and went out to procure a carriage from the next
village. And in half an hour afterwards the whole party took leave of
Doctor Pierre St. Jean and his "institution incomparable," and set
forth on their journey to New Orleans, whence in two days afterwards
they sailed for the North. And now, dear reader, let you and I take the
fast boat and get home before them, to see our little Cap, and find out
what adventures she is now engaged in, and how she is getting on.




CHAPTER XXX.

CAPITOLA A CAPITALIST.

        Plumed victory
    Is truly painted with a cheerful look,
    Equally distant from proud insolence
          And sad dejection.

                          --Massinger.


How glad I am to get back to my little Cap, for I know very well,
reader, just as well as if you had told me, that you have been
grumbling for some time for the want of Cap. But I could not help it,
for, to tell the truth, I was pining after her myself, which was the
reason that I could not do half justice to the scenes of the Mexican
War.

Well, now let us see what Cap has been doing--what oppressors she has
punished--what victims she has delivered--in a word, what new heroic
adventures she has achieved.

Well, the trial of Donald Bayne, alias Black Donald, was over. Cap, of
course, had been compelled to appear against him. During the whole
course of the trial the court-room was crowded with a curious
multitude, "from far and near," eager to get sight of the notorious
outlaw.

Black Donald, through the whole ordeal, deported himself with a gallant
and joyous dignity, that would have better become a triumph than a
trial.

He was indicted upon several distinct counts, the most serious of
which--the murder of the solitary widow and her daughter in the forest
cabin, and the assassination of Eugene Le Noir in the woods near the
Hidden House--were sustained only by circumstantial evidence. But the
aggregate weight of all these, together with his very bad reputation,
was sufficient to convict him, and Black Donald was sentenced to death.

This dreadful doom, most solemnly pronounced by the judge was received
by the prisoner with a loud laugh, and the words:

"You're out o' your reckoning now, cap'n! I never was a saint, the Lord
knows, but my hands are free from blood guiltiness! There's an honest
little girl that believes me--don't you?" he said, turning laughingly
to our little heroine.

"Yes, I do!" said Cap, bursting into tears; "and I am sorry for you as
ever I can be, Donald Bayne."

"Bother! It was sure to come to this first or last, and I knew it! Now,
to prove you do not think this rugged hand of mine stained with blood,
give it a friendly shake!" said the condemned man. And before Old
Hurricane could prevent her, Capitola had jumped over two or three
intervening seats and climbed up to the side of the dock, and reached
up her hand to the prisoner, saying:

"God help you, Donald Bayne, in your great trouble, and I will do all I
can to help you in this world. I will go to the Governor myself, and
tell him I know you never did any murder."

"Remove the prisoner," said the judge, peremptorily.

The constables approached and led away Black Donald.

Old Hurricane rushed upon Cap, seized her, and, shaking her fiercely,
exclaimed, under his breath:

"You--you--you--you New York hurrah boy! You foundling! You vagabond!
You vagrant! You brat! You beggar! Will you never be a lady? To go and
shake hands with that ruffian!"

"Sure, uncle, that's nothing new; I have shaken hands with you often
enough!"

"Demmy, you--you--you New York trash, what do you mean by that?"

"Of course I mean, uncle, that you are as rough a ruffian as ever
Donald Bayne was!"

"Demmy, I'll murder you!"

"Don't, uncle; they have an uncivilized way here of hanging murderers,"
said Cap, shaking herself free of Old Hurricane's grasp, and hastening
out of the court-room to mount her horse and ride home.

One night after tea, Capitola and her uncle occupied their usual seats
by the little bright wood fire, that the chilly evening and keen
mountain air made agreeable, even in May.

Old Hurricane was smoking his pipe and reading his paper.

Cap was sitting with her slender fingers around her throat, which she,
with a shudder, occasionally compressed:

"Well, that demon Black Donald will be hanged the 26th of July," said
Old Hurricane, exultingly, "and we shall get rid of one villain, Cap."

"I pity Black Donald, and I can't bear to think of his being hanged! It
quite breaks my heart to think that I was compelled to bring him to
such a fate!"

"Oh, that reminds me! The reward offered for the apprehension of Black
Donald, to which you were entitled, Cap, was paid over to me for you. I
placed it to your account in the Agricultural Bank."

"I don't want it! I won't touch it! The price of blood! It would burn
my fingers!" said Cap.

"Oh, very well! A thousand dollars won't go a-begging," said Old
Hurricane.

"Uncle, it breaks my heart to think of Black Donald's execution! It
just does! It must be dreadful, this hanging! I have put my finger
around my throat and squeezed it, to know how it feels, and it is
awful. Even a little squeeze makes my head feel as if it would burst,
and I have to let go! Oh, it is horrible to think of!"

"Well, Cap, it wasn't intended to be as pleasant as tickling, you know.
I wish it was twenty times worse! It would serve him right, the
villain! I wish it was lawful to break him on the wheel--I do!"

"Uncle, that is very wicked in you! I declare I won't have it! I'll
write a petition to the Governor to commute his sentence, and carry it
all around the county myself!"

"You wouldn't get a soul to sign it to save your life, much less his."

"I'll go to the Governor myself, and beg him to pardon Donald Bayne!"

"Ha! ha! ha! the Governor would not do it to save all our lives, and if
he were to do such an outrageous thing he might whistle for his
reelection!"

"I declare, Donald Bayne shall not be hanged--and so there!" said Cap,
passionately.

"Whe-ew! You'll deliver him by the strength of your arm, my little
Donna Quixota."

"I'll save him one way or another, now mind I tell you! He sinned more
against me than against anybody else, and so I have the best right of
anybody in the world to forgive him, and I do forgive him! And he
shan't be hanged! I say it!"

"You say it! Ha! ha! ha! Who are you, to turn aside the laws?"

"I, Capitola Black, say that Donald Bayne, not having deserved to be
hanged, shall not be hanged! And in one way or another I'll keep my
word!"

And Cap did her best to keep it. The next morning she mounted Gyp and
rode up to Tip Top, where she employed the village lawyer to draw up a
petition to the Governor for the commutation of Donald Bayne's
sentence. And then she rode all over the county to try to get
signatures to the document. But all in vain. People of every age and
condition too thoroughly feared and hated the famous outlaw, and too
earnestly wished to be entirely and forever rid of him, to sign any
petition for a commutation of his sentence. If a petition for his
instant execution had been carried around it would have stood a much
better chance of success.

Cap spent many days in her fruitless enterprise, but at last gave it
up--but by no means in despair, for--

"I'll save his life, yet! by one means or another! I can't change
clothes with him as I did with Clara; he's too big, but one way or
other I'll save him," said Cap, to herself. She said it to no one else,
for the more difficult the enterprise the more determined she was to
succeed, and the more secretive she grew as to her measures.

In the mean time the outlaw, double-ironed, was confined in the
condemned cell, the strongest portion of the county jail. All persons
were strictly prohibited from visiting him, except certain of the
clergy.

They did all they could to bring the outlaw to a sense of his
condition, to prepare him to meet his fate and to induce him to make a
confession and give up the retreat of his band.

And Donald listened to them with respect, acknowledged himself a great
sinner, and knelt with them when they knelt to pray for him.

But he denied that he was guilty of the murders for which he had been
doomed to die, and he utterly refused to give up his old companions,
replying to the ministers in something like these words:

"Poor wretches! They are no more fit to die than I am, and a condemned
cell, with the thought of the scaffold before him, are not exactly the
most favorable circumstances under which a man might experience sincere
repentance, my masters!"

And so, while the convict listened with docility to all that the
ministers had to say, he steadily persisted in asserting his own
innocence of the crimes for which he was condemned, and in his refusal
to deliver up his companions.

Meantime, Capitola, at Hurricane Hall, was doing all she could to
discover or invent means to save the life of Black Donald. But still
she said no more about it even to Old Hurricane.

One evening, while Cap was sitting by the fire with her thoughts busy
with this subject, her uncle came in saying:

"Cap, I have got some curiosities to show you!"

"What are they?" said Cap, languidly.

"A set of burglar's tools, supposed to belong to some member of Black
Donald's band! One of my negroes found them in the woods in the
neighborhood of the Devil's Punch Bowl! I wrote to the sheriff
concerning them, and he requested me to take care of them until he
should have occasion to call for them. Look! Did you ever see such
things?" said Old Hurricane, setting down a canvas bag upon the table
and turning out from it all sorts of strange looking instruments--tiny
saws, files, punches, screws, picks, etc., etc., etc.

Cap looked at them with the most curious interest, while Old Hurricane
explained their supposed uses.

"It must have been an instrument of this sort, Cap, that that blamed
demon, Donald, gave to the imprisoned men to file their fetters off
with!" he said, showing a thin file of tempered steel.

"That!" said Cap. "Hand it here! Let me see it!" And she examined it
with the deepest interest.

"I wonder what they force locks with?" she inquired.

"Why, this, and this, and this!" said Old Hurricane, producing a
burglar's pick, saw and chisel.

Cap took them and scrutinized them so attentively that Old Hurricane
burst out into a loud laugh, exclaiming:

"You'll dream of house-breakers to-night, Cap!" and taking the tools,
he put them all back in the little canvas bag, and put the bag up on a
high shelf of the parlor closet.

The next morning, while Cap was arranging flowers on the parlor
mantelpiece, Old Hurricane burst in upon her with his hands full of
letters and newspapers, and his heart full of exultation--throwing up
his hat and cutting an alarming caper for a man of his age, he
exclaimed:

"Hurrah, Cap! Hurrah! Peace is at last proclaimed and our victorious
troops are on their way home! It's all in the newspapers, and here are
letters from Herbert, dated from New Orleans! Here are letters for you,
and here are some for me! I have not opened them yet! Hurrah, Cap!
Hurrah!"

"Hurrah, Uncle! Hurrah!" cried Cap, tossing up her flowers and rushing
into his arms.

"Don't squeeze me into an apoplexy, you little bear," said Old
Hurricane, turning purple in the face, from the savage hug of Cap's
joyful arms. "Come along and sit down with me, at this table, and let
us see what the letters have brought us."

They took their seats opposite each other at a small table, and Old
Hurricane threw the whole mail between them, and began to pick out the
letters.

"That's for you, Cap. This is for me," he said, pitching out two in the
handwriting of Herbert Greyson.

Cap opened hers and commenced reading. It was in fact Herbert's first
downright, practical proposal of marriage, in which he begged that
their union might take place as soon as he should return, and that as
he had written to his uncle by the same mail, upon another subject,
which he did not wish to mix up with his own marriage, she would, upon
a proper opportunity, let her uncle know of their plans.

"Upon my word, he takes my consent very coolly as a matter of course,
and even forces upon me the disagreeable duty of asking myself of my
own uncle! Who ever heard of such proceedings? If he were not coming
home from the wars, I declare I should get angry; but I won't get upon
my dignity with Herbert--dear, darling, sweet Herbert. If it were
anybody else, shouldn't they know the difference between their liege
lady and Tom Trotter? However, as it's Herbert, here goes! Now, I
suppose the best way to ask myself of uncle, for Herbert, will be just
to hand him over this letter. The dear knows it isn't so over and above
affectionate that I should hesitate. Uncle," said Cap, pulling Old
Hurricane's coat sleeve.

"Don't bother me, Cap," exclaimed Major Warfield, who sat there holding
a large, closely written document in his hand, with his great round
eyes strained from their sockets, as they passed along the lies with
devouring interest.

"Well, I do declare! I do believe he has received a proposal of
marriage himself," cried Cap, shooting much nearer the truth than she
knew.

Old Hurricane did not hear her. Starting up with the document in his
hand, he rushed from the room and went and shut himself up in his own
study.

"I vow, some widow has offered to marry him," said Cap, to herself.

Old Hurricane did not come to dinner, nor to supper. But after supper,
when Capitola's wonder was at its climax, and while she was sitting by
the little wood fire that that chilly evening required, Old Hurricane
came in, looking very unlike himself, in an humble, confused,
deprecating, yet happy manner, like one who had at once a mortifying
confession to make, a happy secret to tell.

"Cap," he said, trying to suppress a smile, and growing purple in the
face.

--"Oh, yes! You've come to tell me, I suppose, that you're going to put
a step-aunt-in-law over my head, only you don't know how to announce
it," answered Capitola, little knowing how closely she had come to the
truth; when, to her unbounded astonishment, Old Hurricane answered:

"Yes, my dear, that's just it!"

"What! My eyes! Oh, crickey!" cried Cap, breaking into her newsboy's
slang, from mere consternation.

"Yes, my dear, it is perfectly true!" replied the old man, growing
furiously red, and rubbing his face.

"Oh! oh! oh! Hold me! I'm 'kilt!'" cried Cap, falling back in her chair
in an inextinguishable fit of laughter, that shook her whole frame. She
laughed until the tears ran down her cheeks. She wiped her eyes and
looked at Old Hurricane, and every time she saw his confused and happy
face she burst into a fresh paroxysm that seemed to threaten her life
or her reason.

"Who is the happy---- Oh, I can't speak! Oh, I'm 'kilt' entirely!" she
cried, breaking off in the midst of her question and falling into fresh
convulsions.

"It's no new love, Cap; it's my old wife!" said Old Hurricane, wiping
his face.

This brought Capitola up with a jerk! She sat bolt upright, gazing at
him with her eyes fixed as if in death.

"Cap," said Old Hurricane, growing more and more confused, "I've been a
married man more years than I like to think of! Cap, I've--I've a wife
and grown-up son! Why do you sit there staring at me, you little demon?
Why don't you say something to encourage me, you little wretch?"

"Go on!" said Cap, without removing her eyes.

"Cap, I was--a jealous passionate--Demmy, confession isn't in my line.
A diabolical villain made me believe that my poor little wife wasn't
good!"

"There! I knew you'd lay it on somebody else. Men always do that," said
Cap, to herself.

"He was mortally wounded in Mexico. He made a confession and confided
it to Herbert, who has just sent me an attested copy. It was Le Noir.
My poor wife lived under her girlhood's name of Marah Rocke." Old
Hurricane made a gulp, and his voice broke down.

Cap understood all now, as well as if she had known it as long as Old
Hurricane had. She comprehended his extreme agitation upon a certain
evening, years ago, when Herbert Greyson had mentioned Marah Rocke's
name, and his later and more lasting disturbance upon accidentally
meeting Marah Rocke at the Orphans' Court.

This revelation filled her with strange and contradictory emotions. She
was glad; she was angry with him; she was sorry for him; she was
divided between divers impulses to hug and kiss him, to cry over him,
and to seize him and give him a good shaking! And between them she did
nothing at all.

Old Hurricane was again the first to speak.

"What was that you wished to say to me, Cap, when I ran away from you
this morning?"

"Why, uncle, that Herbert wants to follow your example,
and--and--and----" Cap blushed and broke down.

"I thought as much. Getting married at his age! A boy of twenty-five!"
said the veteran in contempt.

"Taking a wife at your age, uncle, an infant of sixty-six!"

"Bother, Cap! Let me see that fellow's letter to you."

Cap handed it to him and the old man read it.

"If I were to object, you'd get married all the same! Demmy! you're
both of age. Do as you please!"

"Thank you, sir," said Cap, demurely.

"And now, Cap, one thing is to be noticed. Herbert says, both in your
letter and in mine, that they were to start to return the day after
these letters were posted. These letters have been delayed in the mail.
Consequently we may expect our hero here every day. But Cap, my dear,
you must receive them. For to-morrow morning, please the Lord, I shall
set out for Staunton and Willow Heights, and go and kneel down at the
feet of my wife, and ask her pardon on my knees!"

Cap was no longer divided between the wish to pull Old Hurricane's gray
beard and to cry over him. She threw herself at once into his arms and
exclaimed:

"Oh, uncle! God bless you! God bless you! God bless you! It has come
very late in life, but may you be happy with her through all the ages
of eternity!"

Old Hurricane was deeply moved by the sympathy of his little madcap,
and pressed her to his bosom, saying:

"Cap, my dear, if you had not set your heart upon Herbert, I would
marry you to my son Traverse, and you two should inherit all that I
have in the world! But never mind, Cap, you have an inheritance of your
own. Cap, Cap, my dear, did it ever occur to you that you might have
had a father and mother?"

"Yes! often! But I used to think you were my father, and that my mother
was dead."

"I wish to the Lord that I had been your father, Cap, and that Marah
Rocke had been your mother! But Cap, your father was a better man than
I, and your mother as good a woman as Marah. And Cap, my dear, you
vagabond, you vagrant, you brat, you beggar, you are the sole heiress
of the Hidden House estate and all its enormous wealth! What do you
think of that, now? What do you think of that, you beggar?" cried Old
Hurricane.

A shriek pierced the air, and Capitola starting up, stood before Old
Hurricane, crying in an impassioned voice:

"Uncle! Uncle! Don't mock me! Don't overwhelm me! I do not care for
wealth or power; but tell me of the parents who possessing both, cast
off their unfortunate child--a girl, too! to meet the sufferings and
perils of such a life as mine had been, if I had not met you!"

"Cap, my dear, hush! Your parents were no more to blame for their
seeming abandonment of you, than I was to blame for the desertion of my
poor wife. We are all the victims of one villain, who has now gone to
his account, Capitola. I mean Gabriel Le Noir. Sit down, my dear, and I
will read the copy of his whole confession, and afterwards, in
addition, tell you all I know upon the subject!"

Capitola resumed her seat, Major Warfield read the confession of
Gabriel Le Noir, and afterwards continued the subject by relating the
events of that memorable Hallowe'en when he was called out in a snow
storm to take the dying deposition of the nurse who had been abducted
with the infant Capitola.

And at the end of his narrative Cap knew as much of her own history as
the reader has known all along.

"And I have a mother, and I shall even see her soon! You told me she
was coming home with the party--did you not, Uncle?" said Capitola.

"Yes, my child. Only think of it! I saved the daughter from the streets
of New York, and my son saved the mother from her prison at the
madhouse! And now, my dear Cap, I must bid you good night and go to
bed, for I intend to rise to-morrow morning long before daylight, to
ride to Tip Top to meet the Staunton stage," said the old man, kissing
Capitola.

Just as he was about to leave the room he was arrested by a loud
ringing and knocking at the door.

Wool was heard running along the front hall to answer the summons.

"Cap, I shouldn't wonder much if that was our party. I wish it may be,
for I should like to welcome them before I leave home to fetch my
wife," said Old Hurricane, in a voice of agitation.

And while they were still eagerly listening, the door was thrown open
by Wool, who announced:

"Marse Herbert, which I mean to say, Major Herbert Greyson;" and
Herbert entered and was grasped by the two hands of Old Hurricane, who
exclaimed:

"Ah, Herbert, my lad! I have got your letters. It is all right,
Herbert, or going to be so. You shall marry Cap when you like. And I am
going to-morrow morning to throw myself at the feet of my wife."

"No need of your going so far, dear sir, no need. Let me speak to my
own dear girl a moment, and then I shall have something to say to you,"
said Herbert, leaving the old man in suspense, and going to salute
Capitola, who returned his fervent embrace by an honest, downright
frank kiss, that made no secret of itself.

"Capitola! My uncle has told you all?"

"Every single bit! So don't lose time by telling it all over again! Is
my mother with you?"

"Yes! and I will bring her in, in one moment; but first I must bring in
some one else," said Herbert, kissing the hand of Capitola and turning
to Old Hurricane, to whom he said:

"You need not travel far to find Marah. We took Staunton in our way
and brought her and Clara along--Traverse!" he said going to the
door--"bring in your mother."

And the next instant Traverse entered with the wife of Major Warfield
upon his arm.

Old Hurricane started forward to meet her, exclaiming in a broken
voice:

"Marah, my dear Marah, God may forgive me, but can you--can you ever do
so?" And he would have sunk at her feet, but that she prevented, by
meeting him and silently placing both her hands in his. And so quietly
Marah's forgiveness was expressed, and the reconciliation sealed.

Meanwhile Herbert went out and brought in Mrs. Le Noir and Clara. Mrs.
Le Noir, with a Frenchwoman's impetuosity, hurried to her daughter and
clasped her to her heart.

Cap gave one hurried glance at the beautiful pale woman that claimed
from her a daughter's love and then, returning the caress, she said:

"Oh, mamma! Oh, mamma! If I were only a boy instead of a girl, I would
thrash that Le Noir within an inch of his life! But I forgot! He has
gone to his account."

Old Hurricane was at this moment shaking hands with his son, Traverse,
who presently took occasion to lead up and introduce his betrothed
wife, Clara Day, to her destined father-in-law.

Major Warfield received her with all a soldier's gallantry, a
gentleman's courtesy and a father's tenderness.

He next shook hands with his old acquaintance, Mrs. Le Noir.

And then supper was ordered and the evening was passed in general and
comparative reminiscences and cheerful conversation.




CHAPTER XXXI.

"THERE SHALL BE LIGHT AT THE EVENTIDE."--_Holy Bible._

    They shall be blessed exceedingly, their store
    Grow daily, weekly more and more,
    And peace so multiply around,
    Their very hearth seems holy ground.

                          --Mary Howitt.


The marriage of Capitola and of Herbert and that of Clara and of
Traverse was fixed to take place upon the first of August, which was
the twenty-first birthday of the doctor's daughter, and also the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the wedding of Ira Warfield and Marah
Rocke.

German husbands and wives have a beautiful custom of keeping the
twenty-fifth anniversary of their marriage by a festival, which they
call the "Silver Wedding." And thus Major Warfield and Marah resolved
to keep this first of August, and further to honor the occasion by
uniting the hands of their young people.

There was but one cloud upon the happiness of Capitola; this was the
approaching execution of Black Donald.

No one else seemed to care about the matter, until a circumstance
occurred which painfully aroused their interest.

This was the fact that the Governor, through the solicitation of
certain ministers of the gospel who represented the condemned as
utterly unprepared to meet his fate, had respited him until the first
of August, at which time he wished the prisoner to be made to
understand that his sentence would certainly, without further delay, be
carried into effect.

This carried a sort of consternation into the heart of every member of
the Hurricane Hall household!

The idea of Black Donald being hanged in their immediate neighborhood
upon their wedding day was appalling!

Yet there was no help for it, unless their wedding was postponed to
another occasion than that upon which Old Hurricane had set his heart.
No one knew what to do.

Cap fretted herself almost sick. She had cudgeled her brains to no
purpose. She had not been able to think of any plan by which she could
deliver Black Donald. Meantime the last days of July were rapidly
passing away.

Black Donald in the condemned cell maintained his firmness, resolutely
asserting his innocence of any capital crime, and persistently refusing
to give up his band. As a last motive of confession, the paper written
by Gabriel Le Noir upon his death-bed was shown him. He laughed a loud,
crackling laugh, and said that was all true, but that he, for his part,
never had intended to harm a hair of Capitola's head; that he had taken
a fancy to the girl when he had first seen her, and had only wanted to
carry her off and force her into a marriage with himself; that he had
pretended to consent to her death only for the purpose of saving her
life.

When Cap heard this she burst into tears and said she believed it was
true.

The night before the wedding of Capitola and Herbert, and Clara and
Traverse, and of the execution of Black Donald, came.

At Hurricane Hall the two prospective bridegrooms were busy with Old
Hurricane over some papers that had to be prepared in the library.

The two intended brides were engaged, under the direction of Mrs.
Warfield, in her dressing-room, consulting over certain proprieties of
the approaching festival. But Capitola could give only a half attention
to the discussion. Her thoughts were with the poor condemned man who
was to die the next day.

And suddenly she flew out of the room, summoned her groom, mounted her
horse, and rode away.

In his condemned cell Black Donald was bitterly realizing how
unprepared he was to die, and how utterly impossible it was for him to
prepare in the short hours left him. He tried to pray, but could form
no other petition than that he might be allowed, if possible, a little
longer to fit himself to meet his Creator. From his cell he could hear
the striking of the great clock in the prison hall. And as every hour
struck it seemed "a nail driven in his coffin."

At eight o'clock that night the warden sat in his little office,
consulting the sheriff about some details of the approaching execution.
While they were still in discussion, a turnkey opened the door, saying:

"A lady to see the warden."

And Capitola stood before them!

"Miss Black!" exclaimed both sheriff and warden, rising in surprise,
gazing upon our heroine, and addressing her by the name under which
they had first known her.

"Yes, gentlemen, it is I. The truth is, I cannot rest to-night without
saying a few words of comfort to the poor man who is to die to-morrow.
So I came hither, attended by my groom, to know if I may see him for a
few minutes."

"Miss Black, here is the sheriff. It is just as he pleases. My orders
were so strict that had you come to me alone I should have been obliged
to refuse you."

"Mr. Keepe, you will not refuse me," said Capitola, turning to the
sheriff.

"Miss Black, my rule is to admit no one but the officers of the prison
and the ministers of the gospel, to see the condemned! This we have
been obliged to observe as a measure of safety. This convict, as you
are aware, is a man of consummate cunning, so that it is really
wonderful he has not found means to make his escape, closely as he has
been watched and strongly as he has been guarded."

"Ah, but Mr. Keepe, his cunning was no match for mine, you know!" said
Capitola, smiling.

"Ha-ha-ha! so it was not! You took him very cleverly! Very cleverly,
indeed! In fact, if it had not been for you, I doubt if ever we should
have captured Black Donald at all. The authorities are entirely
indebted to you for the capture of this notorious outlaw. And really
that being the case, I do think it would be straining a point to refuse
you admittance to see him. So, Miss Black, you have my authority for
visiting the condemned man in his cell and giving him all the comfort
you can. I would attend you thither myself, but I have got to go to see
the captain of a militia company to be on the scene of action
to-morrow," said the sheriff, who soon after took leave of the warden
and departed.

The warden then called a turnkey and ordered him to attend Miss Black
to the condemned cell.

The young turnkey took up a lamp and a great key and walked before,
leading the way down-stairs to a cell in the interior of the basement,
occupied by Black Donald.

He unlocked the door, admitted Capitola, and then walked off to the
extremity of the lobby, as he was accustomed to do when he let in the
preachers.

Capitola thanked heaven for this chance, for had he not done so she
would have to invent some excuse for getting rid of him.

She entered the cell. It was very dimly lighted from the great lamp
that hung in the lobby, nearly opposite the cell door.

By its light she saw Black Donald, not only doubly ironed but confined
by a chain and staple to the wall. He was very pale and haggard from
long imprisonment and great anxiety.

Cap's heart bled for the poor banned and blighted outlaw, who had not a
friend in the world to speak a kind word to him in his trouble.

He also recognized her, and rising and coming to meet her as far as the
length of the chain would permit, he held out his hand and said:

"I am very glad you have come, little one; it is very kind of you to
come and see a poor fellow in his extremity! You are the first female
that has been in this cell since my imprisonment. Think of that, child!
I wanted to see you, too, I wanted to say to you yourself again, that I
was never guilty of murder, and that I only seemed to consent to your
death to save your life! Do you believe this? On the word of a dying
man it is truth!"

"I do believe you, Donald Bayne," said Capitola, in a broken voice.

"I hear that you have come into your estate. I am glad of it. And they
tell me that you are going to be married to-morrow! Well! God bless
you, little one!"

"Oh, Donald Bayne! Can you say God bless me, when it was I who put you
here?"

"Tut, child, we outlaws bear no malice. Spite is a civilized vice. It
was a fair contest, child, and you conquered. It's well you did. Give
me your hand in good will, since I must die to-morrow!"

Capitola gave her hand, and whilst he held it, she stooped and said:

"Donald, I have done everything in the world I could to save your
life!"

"I know you have, child. May yours be long and happy."

"Donald, may your life be longer and better than you think. I have
tried all other means of saving you in vain; there is but one means
left!"

The outlaw started violently, exclaiming:

"Is there one?"

"Donald, yes! There is! I bring you the means of deliverance and
escape. Heaven knows whether I am doing right--for I do not! I know
many people would blame me very much, but I hope that He who forgave
the thief upon the cross and the sinful woman at his feet, will not
condemn me for following His own compassionate example! For, Donald, as
I was the person whom you injured most of all others, so I consider
that I of all others have the best right to pardon you and set you
free. Oh, Donald! Use well the life I am about to give you, else I
shall be chargeable with every future sin you commit!"

"In the name of mercy, girl, do not hold out a false hope. I had nerved
myself to die!"

"But you were not prepared to meet your Maker! Oh, Donald! I hold out
no false hope! Listen, for I must speak low and quick. I could never be
happy again if on my wedding-day you should die a felon's death! Here!
here are tools with the use of which you must be acquainted, for they
were found in the woods near the Hidden House!" said Capitola,
producing from her pockets a burglar's lock-pick, saw, chisel, file,
etc.

Black Donald seized them as a famished wolf might seize his prey.

"Will they do?" inquired Capitola, in breathless anxiety.

"Yes--yes--yes! I can file off my irons, pick every lock, drive back
every bolt, and dislodge every bar between myself and freedom with
these instruments! But, child, there is one thing you have forgotten:
suppose a turnkey or a guard should stop me? You have brought me no
revolver!"

Capitola turned pale.

"Donald, I could easily have brought you a revolver; but I would not,
even to save you from to-morrow's death! No, Donald, no! I give you the
means of freeing yourself, if you can do it, as you may, without
bloodshed! But, Donald, though your life is not justly forfeited, your
liberty is, and so I cannot give you the means of taking any one's life
for the sake of saving your own!"

"You are right," said the outlaw.

"Listen further, Donald. Here are a thousand dollars! I thought never
to have taken it from the bank, for I would never have used the price
of blood! But I drew it to-day for you. Take it--it will help you to
live a better life! When you have picked your way out of this place, go
to the great elm tree at the back of the old mill, and you will find my
horse, Gyp, which I shall have tied there. He is very swift. Mount him
and ride for your life to the nearest seaport, and so escape by a
vessel to some foreign country. And oh, try to lead a good life, and
may God redeem you, Donald Bayne! There--conceal your tools and your
money quickly, for I hear the guard coming. Good-by--and again, God
redeem you, Donald Bayne!"

"God bless you, brave and tender girl! And God forsake me if I do not
heed your advice!" and the outlaw pressed the hand she gave him while
the tears rushed to his eyes.

The guard approached; Capitola turned to meet him. They left the cell
together and Black Donald was locked in for the last time!

"Oh, I hope, I pray, that he may get off! Oh, what shall I do if he
doesn't! How can I enjoy my wedding to-morrow! How can I bear the music
and the dancing and the rejoicing, when I know that a fellow creature
is in such a strait! Oh, Lord grant that Black Donald may get clear off
to-night, for he isn't fit to die!" said Cap to herself, as she hurried
out of the prison.

Her young groom was waiting for her and she mounted her horse and rode
until they got to the old haunted church at the end of the village,
when drawing rein, she said:

"Jem, I am very tired. I will wait here and you must just ride back to
the village, to Mr. Cassell's livery stable, and get a gig, and put
your horse into it, and come back here to drive me home, for I cannot
ride."

Jem, who never questioned his imperious little mistress's orders, rode
off at once to do her bidding.

Cap immediately dismounted from her pony and led him under the deep
shadows of the elm tree, where she fastened him. Then taking his face
between her hands, and looking him in the eyes, she said:

"Gyp, my son, you and I have had many a frolic together, but we've got
to part now! It almost breaks my heart, Gyp, but it is to save a fellow
creature's life, and it can't be helped! He'll treat you well, for my
sake, dear Gyp. Gyp, he'll part with his life sooner than sell you!
Good-by, dear, dear Gyp."

Gyp took all these caresses in a very nonchalant manner, only snorting
and pawing in reply.

Presently the boy came back, bringing the gig. Cap once more hugged Gyp
about the neck, pressed her cheek against his mane, and with a
whispered "Good-by, dear Gyp," sprang into the gig and ordered the boy
to drive home.

"An' leab the pony, miss?"

"Oh, yes, for the present; everybody knows Gyp--no one will steal him.
I have left him length of line enough to move around a little and eat
grass, drink from the brook, or lie down. You can come after him early
to-morrow morning."

The little groom thought this a queer arrangement, but he was not in
the habit of criticising his young mistress's actions.

Capitola got home to a late supper and to the anxious inquiries of her
friends she replied that she had been to the prison to take leave of
Black Donald, and begged that they would not pursue so painful a
subject.

And, in respect to Cap's sympathies, they changed the conversation.

                     *      *      *      *      *

That night the remnant of Black Donald's band were assembled in their
first old haunt, the Old Road Inn. They had met for a twofold
purpose--to bury their old matron, Mother Raven, who, since the death
of her patron and the apprehension of her captain, had returned to the
inn to die--and to bewail the fate of their leader, whose execution was
expected to come off the next day.

The men laid the poor old woman in her woodland grave, and assembled in
the kitchen to keep a death watch in sympathy with their "unfortunate"
captain. They gathered around the table, and foaming mugs of ale were
freely quaffed for "sorrow's dry," they said. But neither laugh, song
nor jest attended their draughts. They were to keep that night's vigil
in honor of their captain, and then were to disband and separate
forever.

Suddenly, in the midst of their heavy grief and utter silence a
familiar sound was heard--a ringing footstep under the back windows.

And every man leaped to his feet, with looks of wild delight and
questioning.

And the next instant the door was flung wide open, and the outlaw chief
stood among them!

Steve stopped rolling and curled himself around Black Donald's neck,
exclaiming:

"It's you--it's you--it's you!--my dear, my darling--my adored--my
sweetheart--my prince!--my lord!--my king!--my dear, dear captain!"

Steve, the lazy mulatto, rolled down upon the floor at his master's
feet, and embraced him in silence.

While Demon Dick growled forth:

"How the foul fiend did you get out?"

And the anxious faces of all the other men silently repeated the
question.

"Not by any help of yours, boys! But don't think I reproach you, lads!
Well I know that you could do nothing on earth to save me! No one on
earth could have helped me except the one who really freed
me--Capitola!"

"That girl again!" exclaimed Hal, in the extremity of wonder.

Steve stopped rolling, and curled himself around the feet of his master
and gazed up in stupid astonishment.

"It's to be hoped, then, you've got her at last, captain," said Demon
Dick.

"No--heaven bless her!--she's in better hands. Now listen, lads, for I
must talk fast! I have already lost a great deal too much time. I went
first to the cave in the Punch Bowl, and, not finding you there, came
here at a venture, where I am happy to meet you for the last time--for
to-night we disband forever!"

"'Twas our intention, captain," said Hal, in a melancholy voice.

Black Donald then threw himself into a seat at the head of the table,
poured out a mug of ale, and invited his band to pledge him. They
gathered around the table, filled their mugs, pledged him standing, and
then resumed their seats to listen to the last words of their chief.

Black Donald commenced and related the manner of his deliverance by
Capitola; and then, taking from his bosom a bag of gold, he poured it
upon the table and divided it into two equal portions, one of which he
handed to "Headlong Hal," saying:

"There, Hal, take that and divide it among your companions, and scatter
to distant parts of the country, where you may yet have a chance of
earning an honest livelihood! As for me, I shall have to quit the
country altogether, and it will take nearly half this sum to enable me
to do it. Now I have not a minute more to give you! So once more pledge
your captain and away!"

The men filled their mugs, rose to their feet, and pledged their leader
in a parting toast and then:

"Good luck to you all!" exclaimed Black Donald, waving his hat thrice
above his head with a valedictory hurrah. And the next moment he was
gone!

That night, if any watchman had been on guard near the stables of
Hurricane Hall, he might have seen a tall man mounted upon Capitola's
pony, ride up in hot haste, dismount and pick the stable lock, take Gyp
by the bridle and lead him in, and presently return leading out
Fleetfoot, Old Hurricane's racer, upon which he mounted and rode away.

The next morning, while Capitola was dressing, her groom rapped at the
door and, in great dismay, begged that he might speak to Miss Cap one
minute.

"Well, what is it, Jem?" said Capitola.

"Oh, Miss Cap, you'll kill me! I done been got up long afore day and
gone to Tip-Top arter Gyp, but somebody done been stole him away afore
I got there!"

"Thank heaven!" cried Capitola, to little Jem's unspeakable amazement.
For to Capitola the absence of her horse meant just the escape of Black
Donald!

The next minute Cap sighed and said:

"Poor Gyp! I shall never see you again!"

That was all she knew of the future!

That morning while they were all at breakfast a groom from the stables
came in with a little canvas bag in his hand, which he laid, with a
bow, before his master.

Major Warfield took it up; it was full of gold, and upon its side was
written, in red chalk:

"Three hundred dollars, to pay for Fleetfoot.--Black Donald, Reformed
Robber."

While Old Hurricane was reading this inscription, the groom said that
Fleetfoot was missing from his stall, and that Miss Cap's pony, that
was supposed to have been stolen, was found in his place, with this bag
of gold tied around his neck!

"It is Black Donald--he has escaped!" cried Old Hurricane, about to
fling himself into a rage, when his furious eyes encountered the gentle
gaze of Marah, that fell like oil on the waves of his rising passion.

"Let him go! I'll not storm on my silver wedding day," said Major
Warfield.

As for Cap, her eyes danced with delight--the only little clouds upon
her bright sky were removed. Black Donald had escaped, to commence a
better life, and Gyp was restored!

That evening a magnificent old-fashioned wedding came off at Hurricane
Hall.

The double ceremony was performed by the bishop of the diocese (then on
a visit to the neighborhood) in the great salon of Hurricane Hall, in
the presence of as large and splendid an assembly as could be gathered
together from that remote neighborhood.

The two brides, of course, were lovely in white satin, Honiton lace,
pearls and orange flowers. "Equally," of course, the bridegrooms were
handsome and elegant, proud and happy.

To this old-fashioned wedding succeeded a round of dinners and evening
parties, given by the wedding guests. And when all these old-time
customs had been observed for the satisfaction of old friends, the
bridal party went upon the new-fashioned tour, for their own delight.
They spent a year in traveling over the eastern continent, and then
returned home to settle upon their patrimonial estates.

Major Warfield and Marah lived at Hurricane Hall and as his heart is
satisfied and at rest, his temper is gradually improving. As the lion
shall be led by the little child, Old Hurricane is led by the gentlest
woman that ever loved or suffered, and she is leading him in his old
age to the Saviour's feet.

Clara and Traverse live at Willow Heights, which has been repaired,
enlarged and improved, and where Traverse has already an extensive
practice, and where both endeavor to emulate the enlightened goodness
of the sainted Doctor Day.

Cap and Herbert, with Mrs. Le Noir, live at the Hidden House, which has
been turned by wealth and taste into a dwelling of light and beauty. As
the bravest are always the gentlest, so the most high-spirited are
always the most forgiving. And thus the weak or wicked old Dorcas
Knight finds still a home under the roof of Mrs. Le Noir. Her only
retribution being the very mild one of having her relations changed in
the fact that her temporary prisoner is now her mistress and sovereign
lady.

I wish I could say "they all lived happy ever after." But the truth is
I have reason to suppose that even Clara had sometimes occasion to
administer to Doctor Rocke dignified curtain lectures, which no doubt
did him good. And I know for a positive fact that our Cap sometimes
gives her "dear, darling, sweet Herbert," the benefit of the sharp edge
of her tongue, which, of course, he deserves.

But notwithstanding all this, I am happy to say that all enjoy a fair
amount of human felicity.


THE END.




Good Fiction Worth Reading.

A series of romances containing several of the old favorites in the
field of historical fiction, replete with powerful romances of love and
diplomacy that excel in thrilling and absorbing interest.

                     *      *      *      *      *

A COLONIAL FREE-LANCE. A story of American Colonial Times. By Chauncey
C. Hotchkiss. Cloth, 12mo. with four illustrations by J. Watson Davis.
Price, $1.00.

A book that appeals to Americans as a vivid picture of Revolutionary
scenes. The story is a strong one, a thrilling one. It causes the true
American to flush with excitement, to devour chapter after chapter,
until the eyes smart, and it fairly smokes with patriotism. The love
story is a singularly charming idyl.


THE TOWER OF LONDON. A Historical Romance of the Times of Lady Jane
Grey and Mary Tudor. By Wm. Harrison Ainsworth. Cloth, 12mo. with four
illustrations by George Cruikshank. Price, $1.00

This romance of the "Tower of London" depicts the Tower as palace,
prison and fortress, with many historical associations. The era is the
middle of the sixteenth century.

The story is divided into two parts, one dealing with Lady Jane Grey,
and the other with Mary Tudor as Queen, introducing other notable
characters of the era. Throughout the story holds the interest of the
reader in the midst of intrigue and conspiracy, extending considerably
over a half a century.


IN DEFIANCE OF THE KING. A Romance of the American Revolution. By
Chauncey C. Hotchkiss. Cloth, 12mo. with four illustrations by J.
Watson Davis. Price, $1.00.

Mr. Hotchkiss has etched in burning words a story of Yankee bravery,
and true love that thrills from beginning to end, with the spirit of
the Revolution. The heart beats quickly, and we feel ourselves taking a
part in the exciting scenes described. His whole story is so absorbing
that you will sit up far into the night to finish it. As a love romance
it is charming.


GARTHOWEN. A story of a Welsh Homestead. By Allen Raine. Cloth, 12mo.
with four illustrations by J. Watson Davis. Price, $1.00.

"This is a little idyl of humble life and enduring love, laid bare
before us, very real and pure, which in its telling shows us some
strong points of Welsh character--the pride, the hasty temper, the
quick dying out of wrath.... We call this a well-written story,
interesting alike through its romance and its glimpses into another
life than ours. A delightful and clever picture of Welsh village life.
The result is excellent."--Detroit Free Press.


MIFANWY. The story of a Welsh Singer. By Allan Raine. Cloth, 12mo. with
four illustrations by J. Watson Davis. Price, $1.00.

"This is a love story, simple, tender and pretty as one would care to
read. The action throughout is brisk and pleasing; the characters, it
is apparent at once, are as true to life as though the author had known
them all personally. Simple in all its situations, the story is worked
up in that touching and quaint strain which never grows wearisome, no
matter how often the lights and shadows of love are introduced. It
rings true, and does not tax the imagination."--Boston Herald.


For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by
the publishers, A. L. BURT COMPANY, 52-58 Duane St., New York.




Good Fiction Worth Reading.

A series of romances containing several of the old favorites in the
field of historical fiction, replete with powerful romances of love and
diplomacy that excel in thrilling and absorbing interest.

                     *      *      *      *      *

DARNLEY. A Romance of the times of Henry VIII. and Cardinal Wolsey. By
G. P. R. James. Cloth, 12mo. with four illustrations by J. Watson
Davis. Price, $1.00.

In point of publication, "Darnley" is that work by Mr. James which
follows "Richelieu," and, if rumor can be credited, it was owing to the
advice and insistence of our own Washington Irving that we are indebted
primarily for the story, the young author questioning whether he could
properly paint the difference in the characters of the two great
cardinals. And it is not surprising that James should have hesitated;
he had been eminently successful in giving to the world the portrait of
Richelieu as a man, and by attempting a similar task with Wolsey as the
theme, was much like tempting fortune. Irving insisted that "Darnley"
came naturally in sequence, and this opinion being supported by Sir
Walter Scott, the author set about the work.

As a historical romance "Darnley" is a book that can be taken up
pleasurably again and again, for there is about it that subtle charm
which those who are strangers to the works of G. P. R. James have
claimed was only to be imparted by Dumas.

If there was nothing more about the work to attract especial attention,
the account of the meeting of the kings on the historic "field of the
cloth of gold" would entitle the story to the most favorable
consideration of every reader.

There is really but little pure romance in this story, for the author
has taken care to imagine love passages only between those whom history
has credited with having entertained the tender passion one for
another, and he succeeds in making such lovers as all the world must
love.


CAPTAIN BRAND, OF THE SCHOONER CENTIPEDE. By Lieut. Henry A. Wise,
U.S.N. (Harry Gringo). Cloth, 12mo. with four illustrations by J. Watson
Davis. Price, $1.00.

The re-publication of this story will please those lovers of sea yarns
who delight in so much of the salty flavor of the ocean as can come
through the medium of a printed page, for never has a story of the sea
and those "who go down in ships" been written by one more familiar with
the scenes depicted.

The one book of this gifted author which is best remembered, and which
will be read with pleasure for many years to come, is "Captain Brand,"
who, as the author states on his title page, was a "pirate of eminence
in the West Indies." As a sea story pure and simple, "Captain Brand"
has never been excelled, and as a story of piratical life, told without
the usual embellishments of blood and thunder, it has no equal.


NICK OF THE WOODS. A story of the Early Settlers of Kentucky. By Robert
Montgomery Bird. Cloth, 12mo. with four illustrations by J. Watson
Davis. Price, $1.00.

This most popular novel and thrilling story of early frontier life in
Kentucky was originally published in the year 1837. The novel, long out
of print, had in its day a phenomenal sale, for its realistic
presentation of Indian and frontier life in the early days of
settlement in the South, narrated in the tale with all the art of a
practiced writer. A very charming love romance runs through the story.
This new and tasteful edition of "Nick of the Woods" will be certain to
make many new admirers for this enchanting story from Dr. Bird's clever
and versatile pen.


For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by
the publishers, A. L. BURT COMPANY, 52-58 Duane St., New York.




Good Fiction Worth Reading.

A series of romances containing several of the old favorites in the
field of historical fiction, replete with powerful romances of love and
diplomacy that excel in thrilling and absorbing interest.

                     *      *      *      *      *

GUY FAWKES. A Romance of the Gunpowder Treason. By Wm. Harrison
Ainsworth. Cloth, 12mo. with four illustrations by George Cruikshank.
Price, $1.00.

The "Gunpowder Plot" was a modest attempt to blow up Parliament, the
King and his Counsellors. James of Scotland, then King of England, was
weak-minded and extravagant. He hit upon the efficient scheme of
extorting money from the people by imposing taxes on the Catholics. In
their natural resentment to this extortion, a handful of bold spirits
concluded to overthrow the government. Finally the plotters were
arrested, and the King put to torture Guy Fawkes and the other
prisoners with royal vigor. A very intense love story runs through the
entire romance.


THE SPIRIT OF THE BORDER. A Romance of the Early Settlers in the Ohio
Valley. By Zane Grey. Cloth, 12mo. with four illustrations by J. Watson
Davis. Price, $1.00.

A book rather out of the ordinary is this "Spirit of the Border." The
main thread of the story has to do with the work of the Moravian
missionaries in the Ohio Valley. Incidentally the reader is given
details of the frontier life of those hardy pioneers who broke the
wilderness for the planting of this great nation. Chief among these, as
a matter of course, is Lewis Wetzel, one of the most peculiar, and at
the same time the most admirable of all the brave men who spent their
lives battling with the savage foe, that others might dwell in
comparative security.

Details of the establishment and destruction of the Moravian "Village
of Peace" are given at some length, and with minute description. The
efforts to Christianize the Indians are described as they never have
been before, and the author has depicted the characters of the leaders
of the several Indian tribes with great care, which of itself will be
of interest to the student.

By no means least among the charms of the story are the vivid
word-pictures of the thrilling adventures, and the intense paintings of
the beauties of nature, as seen in the almost unbroken forests.

It is the spirit of the frontier which is described, and one can by it,
perhaps, the better understand why men, and women, too, willingly
braved every privation and danger that the westward progress of the
star of empire might be the more certain and rapid. A love story,
simple and tender, runs through the book.


RICHELIEU. A tale of France in the reign of King Louis XIII. By G. P.
R. James. Cloth, 12mo. with four illustrations by J. Watson Davis.
Price, $1.00.

In 1829 Mr. James published his first romance, "Richelieu," and was
recognized at once as one of the masters of the craft.

In this book he laid the story during those later days of the great
cardinal's life, when his power was beginning to wane, but while it was
yet sufficiently strong to permit now and then of volcanic outbursts
which overwhelmed foes and carried friends to the topmost wave of
prosperity. One of the most striking portions of the story is that of
Cinq Mar's conspiracy; the method of conducting criminal cases, and the
political trickery resorted to by royal favorites, affording a better
insight into the state-craft of that day than can be had even by an
exhaustive study of history. It is a powerful romance of love and
diplomacy, and in point of thrilling and absorbing interest has never
been excelled.


For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by
the publishers, A. L. BURT COMPANY, 52-58 Duane St., New York.




Good Fiction Worth Reading.

A series of romances containing several of the old favorites in the
field of historical fiction, replete with powerful romances of love and
diplomacy that excel in thrilling and absorbing interest.

                     *      *      *      *      *

WINDSOR CASTLE. A Historical Romance of the Reign of Henry VIII.,
Catharine of Aragon and Anne Boleyn. By Wm. Harrison Ainsworth. Cloth,
12mo. with four illustrations by George Cruikshank. Price, $1.00.

"Windsor Castle" is the story of Henry VIII., Catharine, and Anne
Boleyn. "Bluff King Hal," although a well-loved monarch, was none too
good a one in many ways. Of all his selfishness and unwarrantable acts,
none was more discreditable than his divorce from Catharine, and his
marriage to the beautiful Anne Boleyn. The King's love was as brief as
it was vehement. Jane Seymour, waiting maid on the Queen, attracted
him, and Anne Boleyn was forced to the block to make room for her
successor. This romance is one of extreme interest to all readers.


HORSESHOE ROBINSON. A tale of the Tory Ascendency in South Carolina in
1780. By John P. Kennedy. Cloth, 12mo. with four illustrations by J.
Watson Davis. Price, $1.00.

Among the old favorites in the field of what is known as historical
fiction, there are none which appeal to a larger number of Americans
than Horseshoe Robinson, and this because it is the only story which
depicts with fidelity to the facts the heroic efforts of the colonists
in South Carolina to defend their homes against the brutal oppression
of the British under such leaders as Cornwallis and Tarleton.

The reader is charmed with the story of love which forms the thread of
the tale, and then impressed with the wealth of detail concerning those
times. The picture of the manifold sufferings of the people, is never
overdrawn, but painted faithfully and honestly by one who spared
neither time nor labor in his efforts to present in this charming love
story all that price in blood and tears which the Carolinians paid as
their share in the winning of the republic.

Take it all in all, "Horseshoe Robinson" is a work which should be
found on every book-shelf, not only because it is a most entertaining
story, but because of the wealth of valuable information concerning the
colonists which it contains. That it has been brought out once more,
well illustrated, is something which will give pleasure to thousands
who have long desired an opportunity to read the story again, and to
the many who have tried vainly in these latter days to procure a copy
that they might read it for the first time.


THE PEARL OF ORR'S ISLAND. A story of the Coast of Maine. By Harriet
Beecher Stowe. Cloth, 12mo. Illustrated. Price, $1.00.

Written prior to 1862, the "Pearl of Orr's Island" is ever new; a book
filled with delicate fancies, such as seemingly array themselves anew
each time one reads them. One sees the "sea like an unbroken mirror all
around the pine-girt, lonely shores of Orr's Island," and straightway
comes "the heavy, hollow moan of the surf on the beach, like the wild
angry howl of some savage animal."

Who can read of the beginning of that sweet life, named Mara, which
came into this world under the very shadow of the Death angel's wings,
without having an intense desire to know how the premature bud
blossomed? Again and again one lingers over the descriptions of the
character of that baby boy Moses, who came through the tempest, amid
the angry billows, pillowed on his dead mother's breast.

There is no more faithful portrayal of New England life than that which
Mrs. Stowe gives in "The Pearl of Orr's Island."


For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by
the publishers, A. L. BURT COMPANY, 52-58 Duane St., New York.






End of Project Gutenberg's Capitola's Peril, by Mrs. E.D.E.N. Southworth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPITOLA'S PERIL ***

***** This file should be named 24337-8.txt or 24337-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/3/3/24337/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Project Gutenberg's On a Chinese Screen, by William Somerset Maugham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: On a Chinese Screen

Author: William Somerset Maugham

Release Date: April 25, 2015 [EBook #48788]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON A CHINESE SCREEN ***




Produced by Dianna Adair, zsak and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









  ON A CHINESE SCREEN
  -------------------
  W. SOMERSET MAUGHAM




  By W. SOMERSET MAUGHAM

  THE LAND OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN
  OF HUMAN BONDAGE
  THE MOON AND SIXPENCE
  THE TREMBLING OF A LEAF
  LIZA OF LAMBETH
  MRS. CRADDOCK
  THE EXPLORER
  THE MAGICIAN




ON A CHINESE SCREEN

  BY
  W. SOMERSET MAUGHAM

  Illustration: Publishers windmill logo

  1922
  LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




_Printed in Great Britain_

_Copyright: London, William Heinemann, 1922_




  FOR
  SYRIE




CONTENTS


                                                     PAGE

        I  THE RISING OF THE CURTAIN                   11

       II  MY LADY'S PARLOUR                           14

      III  THE MONGOL CHIEF                            17

       IV  THE ROLLING STONE                           19

        V  THE CABINET MINISTER                        23

       VI  DINNER PARTIES                              27

      VII  THE ALTAR OF HEAVEN                         33

     VIII  THE SERVANTS OF GOD                         35

       IX  THE INN                                     40

        X  THE GLORY HOLE                              44

       XI  FEAR                                        47

      XII  THE PICTURE                                 55

     XIII  HER BRITANNIC MAJESTY'S REPRESENTATIVE      57

      XIV  THE OPIUM DEN                               60

       XV  THE LAST CHANCE                             62

      XVI  THE NUN                                     64

     XVII  HENDERSON                                   66

    XVIII  DAWN                                        70

      XIX  THE POINT OF HONOUR                         73

       XX  THE BEAST OF BURDEN                         77

      XXI  DR. MACALISTER                              80

     XXII  THE ROAD                                    85

    XXIII  GOD'S TRUTH                                 90

     XXIV  ROMANCE                                     94

      XXV  THE GRAND STYLE                             99

     XXVI  RAIN                                       103

    XXVII  SULLIVAN                                   107

   XXVIII  THE DINING-ROOM                            109

     XXIX  ARABESQUE                                  113

      XXX  THE CONSUL                                 114

     XXXI  THE STRIPLING                              122

    XXXII  THE FANNINGS                               124

   XXXIII  THE SONG OF THE RIVER                      129

    XXXIV  MIRAGE                                     131

     XXXV  THE STRANGER                               134

    XXXVI  DEMOCRACY                                  140

   XXXVII  THE SEVENTH DAY ADVENTIST                  144

  XXXVIII  THE PHILOSOPHER                            147

    XXXIX  THE MISSIONARY LADY                        159

       XL  A GAME OF BILLIARDS                        162

      XLI  THE SKIPPER                                164

     XLII  THE SIGHTS OF THE TOWN                     166

    XLIII  NIGHTFALL                                  171

     XLIV  THE NORMAL MAN                             173

      XLV  THE OLD TIMER                              179

     XLVI  THE PLAIN                                  183

    XLVII  FAILURE                                    186

   XLVIII  A STUDENT OF THE DRAMA                     188

     XLIX  THE TAIPAN                                 193

        L  METEMPSYCHOSIS                             204

       LI  THE FRAGMENT                               206

      LII  ONE OF THE BEST                            211

     LIII  THE SEA-DOG                                214

      LIV  THE QUESTION                               221

       LV  THE SINOLOGUE                              223

      LVI  THE VICE-CONSUL                            225

     LVII  A CITY BUILT ON A ROCK                     231

    LVIII  A LIBATION TO THE GODS                     236




ON A CHINESE SCREEN




I

THE RISING OF THE CURTAIN


You come to the row of hovels that leads to the gate of the city. They
are built of dried mud and so dilapidated that you feel a breath of
wind will lay them flat upon the dusty earth from which they have been
made. A string of camels, heavily laden, steps warily past you. They
wear the disdainful air of profiteers forced to traverse a world in
which many people are not so rich as they. A little crowd, tattered
in their blue clothes, is gathered about the gate and it scatters as
a youth in a pointed cap gallops up on a Mongolian pony. A band of
children are chasing a lame dog and they throw clods of mud at it. Two
stout gentlemen in long black gowns of figured silk and silk jackets
stand talking to one another. Each holds a little stick, perched on
which, with a string attached to its leg, is a little bird. They have
brought out their pets for an airing and in friendly fashion compare
their merits. Now and then the birds give a flutter into the air,
the length of the string, and return quickly to their perch. The two
Chinese gentlemen, smiling, look at them with soft eyes. Rude boys cry
out at the foreigner in a shrill and scornful voice. The city wall,
crumbling, old and crenellated, looks like the city wall in an old
picture of some Palestinish town of the Crusaders.

You pass through the gateway into a narrow street lined with shops:
many of them with their elegant lattice work, red and gold, and their
elaborate carving, have a peculiar ruined magnificence, and you imagine
that in their dark recesses are sold all manner of strange wares of
the fabulous East. A great multitude surges along the uneven narrow
footwalk or in the deepset street; and coolies, bearing heavy loads,
shout for way in short sharp cries. Hawkers with guttural sound call
their wares.

And now at a sedate pace, drawn by a sleek mule, comes a Peking cart.
Its hood is bright blue and its great wheels are studded with nails.
The driver sits with dangling legs on a shaft. It is evening and the
sun sets red behind the yellow, steep, and fantastic roof of a temple.
The Peking cart, the blind in front drawn down, passes silently and
you wonder who it is that sits cross-legged within. Perhaps it is a
scholar, all the learning of the classics at his finger ends, bound on
a visit to a friend with whom he will exchange elaborate compliments
and discuss the golden age of Tang and Sung which can return no more;
perhaps it is a singing girl in splendid silks and richly embroidered
coat, with jade in her black hair, summoned to a party so that she may
sing a little song and exchange elegant repartee with young blades
cultured enough to appreciate wit. The Peking cart disappears into the
gathering darkness: it seems to carry all the mystery of the East.




II

MY LADY'S PARLOUR


"I really think I can make something of it," she said.

She looked about her briskly, and the light of the creative imagination
filled her eyes with brightness.

It was an old temple, a small one, in the city, which she had taken
and was turning into a dwelling house. It had been built for a very
holy monk by his admirers three hundred years before, and here in
great piety, practising innumerable austerities, he had passed his
declining days. For long after in memory of his virtue the faithful
had come to worship, but in course of time funds had fallen very low
and at last the two or three monks that remained were forced to leave.
It was weather-beaten and the green tiles of the roof were overgrown
with weeds. The raftered ceiling was still beautiful with its faded
gold dragons on a faded red; but she did not like a dark ceiling, so
she stretched a canvas across and papered it. Needing air and sunlight,
she cut two large windows on one side. She very luckily had some blue
curtains which were just the right size. Blue was her favourite colour:
it brought out the colour of her eyes. Since the columns, great red
sturdy columns, oppressed her a little she papered them with a very
nice paper which did not look Chinese at all. She was lucky also with
the paper with which she covered the walls. It was bought in a native
shop, but really it might have come from Sandersons'; it was a very
nice pink stripe and it made the place look cheerful at once. At the
back was a recess in which had stood a great lacquer table and behind
it an image of the Buddha in his eternal meditation. Here generations
of believers had burned their tapers and prayed, some for this temporal
benefit or that, some for release from the returning burden of earthly
existence; and this seemed to her the very place for an American stove.
She was obliged to buy her carpet in China, but she managed to get
one that looked so like an Axminster that you would hardly know the
difference. Of course, being hand-made, it had not quite the smoothness
of the English article, but it was a very decent substitute. She was
able to buy a very nice lot of furniture from a member of the Legation
who was leaving the country for a post in Rome, and she got a nice
bright chintz from Shanghai to make loose covers with. Fortunately
she had quite a number of pictures, wedding presents and some even
that she had bought herself, for she was very artistic, and these gave
the room a cosy look. She needed a screen and here there was no help
for it, she had to buy a Chinese one, but as she very cleverly said,
you might perfectly well have a Chinese screen in England. She had a
great many photographs, in silver frames, one of them of a Princess
of Schleswig-Holstein, and one of the Queen of Sweden, both signed,
and these she put on the grand piano, for they give a room an air of
being lived in. Then, having finished, she surveyed her work with
satisfaction.

"Of course it doesn't look like a room in London," she said, "but it
might quite well be a room in some nice place in England, Cheltenham,
say, or Tunbridge Wells."




III

THE MONGOL CHIEF


Heaven knows from what mysterious distance he had come. He rode
down the winding pathway from the high Mongolian plateau with the
mountains, barren, stony, and inaccessible, stretching on all sides,
an impenetrable barrier; he rode down past the temple that guarded
the head of the pass till he came to the old river bed which was the
gateway into China. It was hedged in by the foothills brilliant under
the morning sun, with sharp shadows; and the innumerable traffic of the
centuries had formed on that stony floor a rough road. The air was keen
and clear, the sky was blue. Here all the year round from daybreak till
sundown, passed an unending stream, camels in caravan bearing the brick
tea to Urga seven hundred miles away and so to Siberia, long lines of
wagons drawn by placid bullocks, and little carts in twos and threes
behind stout ponies; and in the contrary direction, into China, again
camels in caravan bringing hides to the markets of Peking, and wagons
in long procession. Now a mob of horses went by and then a flock of
goats. But his eyes did not rest on the various scene. He seemed not
to notice that others were travelling the pass. He was accompanied by
his henchmen, six or seven of them, somewhat bedraggled it is true,
on sorry nags, but they had a truculent air. They ambled along in a
slovenly bunch. He was dressed in a black silk coat and black silk
trousers thrust into his long riding boots with their turned-up toes,
and on his head he wore the high sable cap of his country. He held
himself erect, riding a little ahead of his followers, proudly, and as
he rode, his head high and his eyes steady, you wondered if he thought
that down this pass in days gone by his ancestors had ridden, ridden
down upon the fertile plain of China where rich cities lay ready to
their looting.




IV

THE ROLLING STONE


I heard his extraordinary story before I saw him and I expected
someone of striking appearance. It seemed to me that anyone who had
gone through such singular experiences must have in his outer man
something singular too. But I found a person in whose aspect there was
nothing remarkable. He was smaller than the average, somewhat frail,
sun-burned, with hair beginning to turn grey though he was still under
thirty, and brown eyes. He looked like anybody else, and you might
see him half a dozen times before remembering who he was. If you had
happened upon him behind the counter of a department store or on a
stool in a broker's office you would have thought him perfectly in
place. But you would have noticed him as little as you noticed the
counter or the stool. There was so little in him to attract attention
that in the end it became intriguing: his face, empty of significance,
reminded you of the blank wall of a Manchu palace, in a sordid street,
behind which you knew were painted courtyards, carved dragons, and
heaven knows what subtle intricacy of life.

For his whole career was remarkable. The son of a veterinary surgeon,
he had been a reporter in the London police courts and then had gone
as steward on board a merchant ship to Buenos Ayres. There he had
deserted and somehow or other had worked his way across South America.
From a port in Chili he managed to get to the Marquesas where for six
months he had lived on the natives always ready to offer hospitality
to a white man, and then, begging a passage on a schooner to Tahiti,
had shipped to Amoy as second mate of an old tub which carried Chinese
labour to the Society Islands.

That was nine years before I met him and since then he had lived in
China. First he got work with the B.A.T. Company, but after a couple of
years he found it monotonous; and having acquired a certain knowledge
of the language he entered the employment of a firm which distributed
patent medicines through the length and breadth of the land. For three
years he wandered in province after province, selling pills, and at the
end of it had saved eight hundred dollars. He cut himself adrift once
more.

He began then the most remarkable of his adventures. He set out from
Peking on a journey right across the country, travelling in the guise
of a poor Chinaman, with his roll of bedding, his Chinese pipe, and
his tooth-brush. He stayed in the Chinese inns, sleeping on the kangs
huddled up with fellow wayfarers, and ate the Chinese food. This alone
is no mean feat. He used the train but little, going for the most part
on foot, by cart, or by river. He went through Shensi and Shansi;
he walked on the windy plateaus of Mongolia and risked his life in
barbaric Turkestan; he spent long weeks with the nomads of the desert
and travelled with the caravans that carried the brick tea across the
arid wilderness of Gobi. At last, four years later, having spent his
last dollar he reached Peking once more.

He set about looking for a job. The easiest way to earn money seemed to
write, and the editor of one of the English papers in China offered to
take a series of articles on his journey. I suppose his only difficulty
was to choose from the fulness of his experience. He knew much which
he was perhaps the only Englishman to know. He had seen all manner of
things, quaint, impressive, terrible, amusing, and unexpected. He wrote
twenty-four articles. I will not say that they were unreadable, for
they showed a careful and a sympathetic observation; but he had seen
everything at haphazard, as it were, and they were but the material of
art. They were like the catalogue of the Army and Navy Stores, a mine
to the imaginative man, but the foundation of literature rather than
literature itself. He was the field naturalist who patiently collects
an infinity of facts, but has no gift for generalisation: they remain
facts that await the synthesis of minds more complicated than his.
He collected neither plants nor beasts, but men. His collection was
unrivalled, but his knowledge of it slender.

When I met him I sought to discern how the variety of his experience
had affected him; but though he was full of anecdote, a jovial,
friendly creature, willing to talk at length of all he had seen, I
could not discover that any of his adventures had intimately touched
him. The instinct to do all the queer things he had done showed that
there was in him a streak of queerness. The civilised world irked him
and he had a passion to get away from the beaten trail. The oddities
of life amused him. He had an insatiable curiosity. But I think his
experiences were merely of the body and were never translated into
experiences of the soul. Perhaps that is why at bottom you felt he was
commonplace. The insignificance of his mien was a true index to the
insignificance of his soul. Behind the blank wall was blankness.

That was certainly why with so much to write about he wrote tediously,
for in writing the important thing is less richness of material than
richness of personality.




V

THE CABINET MINISTER


He received me in a long room looking on to a sandy garden. The roses
withered on the stunted bushes and the great old trees flagged forlorn.
He sat me down on a square stool at a square table and took his seat
in front of me. A servant brought cups of flowered tea and American
cigarettes. He was a thin man, of the middle height, with thin, elegant
hands; and through his gold-rimmed spectacles he looked at me with
large, dark, and melancholy eyes. He had the look of a student or of a
dreamer. His smile was very sweet. He wore a brown silk gown and over
it a short black silk jacket, and on his head a billycock hat.

"Is it not strange," he said, with his charming smile, "that we Chinese
wear this gown because three hundred years ago the Manchus were
horsemen?"

"Not so strange," I retorted, "as that because the English won the
battle of Waterloo Your Excellency should wear a bowler."

"Do you think that is why I wear it?"

"I could easily prove it."

Since I was afraid that his exquisite courtesy would prevent him from
asking me how, I hastened in a few well-chosen words to do so.

He took off his hat and looked at it with the shadow of a sigh. I
glanced round the room. It had a green Brussels carpet, with great
flowers on it, and round the walls were highly carved blackwood chairs.
From a picture rail hung scrolls on which were writings by the great
masters of the past, and to vary these, in bright gold frames, were oil
paintings which in the nineties might very well have been exhibited in
the Royal Academy. The minister did his work at an American roll-top
desk.

He talked to me with melancholy of the state of China. A civilisation,
the oldest the world had known, was now being ruthlessly swept away.
The students who came back from Europe and from America were tearing
down what endless generations had built up, and they were placing
nothing in its stead. They had no love of their country, no religion,
no reverence. The temples, deserted by worshipper and priest, were
falling into decay and presently their beauty would be nothing but a
memory.

But then, with a gesture of his thin, aristocratic hands, he put the
subject aside. He asked me whether I would care to see some of his
works of art. We walked round the room and he showed me priceless
porcelains, bronzes, and Tang figures. There was a horse from a grave
in Honan which had the grace and the exquisite modelling of a Greek
work. On a large table by the side of his desk was a number of rolls.
He chose one and holding it at the top gave it to me to unroll. It
was a picture of some early dynasty of mountains seen through fleecy
clouds, and with smiling eyes he watched my pleasure as I looked.
The picture was set aside and he showed me another and yet another.
Presently I protested that I could not allow a busy man to waste his
time on me, but he would not let me go. He brought out picture after
picture. He was a connoisseur. He was pleased to tell me the schools
and periods to which they belonged and neat anecdotes about their
painters.

"I wish I could think it was possible for you to appreciate my greatest
treasures," he said, pointing to the scrolls that adorned his walls.
"Here you have examples of the most perfect calligraphies of China."

"Do you like them better than paintings?" I asked.

"Infinitely. Their beauty is more chaste. There is nothing meretricious
in them. But I can quite understand that a European would have
difficulty in appreciating so severe and so delicate an art. Your taste
in Chinese things tends a little to the grotesque, I think."

He produced books of paintings and I turned their leaves. Beautiful
things! With the dramatic instinct of the collector he kept to the last
the book by which he set most store. It was a series of little pictures
of birds and flowers, roughly done with a few strokes, but with such
a power of suggestion, with so great a feeling for nature and such a
playful tenderness, that it took your breath away. There were sprigs of
plum-blossom that held in their dainty freshness all the magic of the
spring; there were sparrows in whose ruffled plumage were the beat and
the tremor of life. It was the work of a great artist.

"Will these American students ever produce anything like this?" he
asked with a rueful smile.

But to me the most charming part of it was that I knew all the time
that he was a rascal. Corrupt, inefficient, and unscrupulous, he
let nothing stand in his way. He was a master of the squeeze. He
had acquired a large fortune by the most abominable methods. He was
dishonest, cruel, vindictive, and venal. He had certainly had a share
in reducing China to the desperate plight which he so sincerely
lamented. But when he held in his hand a little vase of the colour
of lapis lazuli his fingers seemed to curl about it with a charming
tenderness, his melancholy eyes caressed it as they looked, and his
lips were slightly parted as though with a sigh of desire.




VI

DINNER PARTIES


I: LEGATION QUARTER

The Swiss director of the Banque Sino-Argentine was announced. He
came with a large, handsome wife, who displayed her opulent charms so
generously that it made you a little nervous. It was said that she had
been a _cocotte_, and an English maiden lady (in salmon pink satin and
beads) who had come early, greeted her with a thin and frigid smile.
The Minister of Guatemala and the Charg d'Affaires of Montenegro
entered together. The Charg d'Affaires was in a state of extreme
agitation; he had not understood that it was an official function, he
thought he had been asked to dine _en petit comit_, and he had not put
on his orders. And there was the Minister of Guatemala blazing with
stars! What in heaven's name was to be done? The emotion caused by what
for a moment seemed almost a diplomatic incident was diverted by the
appearance of two Chinese servants in long silk robes and four-sided
hats with cocktails and zakouski. Then a Russian princess sailed in.
She had white hair and a black silk dress up to her neck. She looked
like the heroine of a play by Victorien Sardou who had outlived the
melodramatic fury of her youth and now did crochet. She was infinitely
bored when you spoke to her of Tolstoi or Chekov; but grew animated
when she talked of Jack London. She put a question to the maiden lady
which the maiden lady, though no longer young, had no answer for.

"Why," she asked, "do you English write such silly books about Russia?"

But then the first secretary of the British Legation appeared. He gave
his entrance the significance of an event. He was very tall, baldish
but elegant, and he was beautifully dressed: he looked with polite
astonishment at the dazzling orders of the Minister of Guatemala. The
Charg d'Affaires of Montenegro, who flattered himself that he was the
best dressed man in the diplomatic body, but was not quite sure whether
the first secretary of the British Legation thought him so, fluttered
up to him to ask his candid opinion of the frilled shirt he wore. The
Englishman placed a gold-rimmed glass in his eye and looked at it for
a moment gravely; then he paid the other a devastating compliment.
Everyone had come by now but the wife of the French Military Attach.
They said she was always late.

"_Elle est insupportable_," said the handsome wife of the Swiss banker.

But at last, magnificently indifferent to the fact that she had kept
everyone waiting for half an hour, she swam into the room. She was tall
on her outrageously high heels, extremely thin, and she wore a dress
that gave you the impression that she had nothing on at all. Her hair
was bobbed and blonde, and she was boldly painted. She looked like a
post-impressionist's idea of patient Griselda. When she moved the air
was heavy with exotic odours. She gave the Minister of Guatemala a
jewelled, emaciated hand to kiss; with a few smiling words made the
banker's wife feel passe, provincial, and portly; flung an improper
jest at the English lady whose embarrassment was mitigated by the
knowledge that the wife of the French Military Attach was _trs bien
ne_; and drank three cocktails in rapid succession.

Dinner was served. The conversation varied from a resonant, rolling
French to a somewhat halting English. They talked of this Minister who
had just written from Bucharest or Lima, and that Counsellor's wife
who found it so dull in Christiania or so expensive in Washington. On
the whole it made little difference to them in what capital they found
themselves, for they did precisely the same things in Constantinople,
Berne, Stockholm and Peking. Entrenched within their diplomatic
privileges and supported by a lively sense of their social consequence,
they dwelt in a world in which Copernicus had never existed, for to
them sun and stars circled obsequiously round this earth of ours, and
they were its centre. No one knew why the English lady was there and
the wife of the Swiss director said privately that she was without
doubt a German spy. But she was an authority on the country. She told
you that the Chinese had such perfect manners and you really should
have known the Empress Dowager; she was a perfect darling. You knew
very well that in Constantinople she would have assured you that the
Turks were such perfect gentlemen and the Sultana Fatima was a perfect
dear and spoke such wonderful French. Homeless, she was at home
wherever her country had a diplomatic representative.

The first secretary of the British Legation thought the party rather
mixed. He spoke French more like a Frenchman than any Frenchman who
ever lived. He was a man of taste, and he had a natural aptitude for
being right. He only knew the right people and only read the right
books; he admired none but the right music and cared for none but the
right pictures; he bought his clothes at the right tailor's and his
shirts from the only possible haberdasher. You listened to him with
stupefaction. Presently you wished with all your heart that he would
confess to a liking for something just a little vulgar: you would
have felt more at your ease if only with bold idiosyncrasy he had
claimed that _The Soul's Awakening_ was a work of art or _The Rosary_ a
masterpiece. But his taste was faultless. He was perfect and you were
half afraid that he knew it, for in repose his face had the look of one
who bears an intolerable burden. And then you discovered that he wrote
_vers libre_. You breathed again.


II: AT A TREATY PORT

There was about the party a splendour which has vanished from the
dinner tables of England. The mahogany groaned with silver. In the
middle of the snowy damask cloth was a centrepiece of yellow silk such
as you were unwillingly constrained to buy in the bazaars of your prim
youth and on this was a massive pergne. Tall silver vases in which
were large chrysanthemums made it possible to catch only glimpses of
the persons opposite you, and tall silver candlesticks reared their
proud heads two by two down the length of the table. Each course
was served with its appropriate wine, sherry with the soup and hock
with the fish; and there were the two entres, a white entre and a
brown entre, which the careful housekeeper of the nineties felt were
essential to a properly arranged dinner.

Perhaps the conversation was less varied than the courses, for guests
and hosts had seen one another nearly every day for an intolerable
number of years and each topic that arose was seized upon desperately
only to be exhausted and followed by a formidable silence. They talked
of racing and golf and shooting. They would have thought it bad form to
touch upon the abstract and there were no politics for them to discuss.
China bored them all, they did not want to speak of that; they only
knew just so much about it as was necessary to their business, and they
looked with distrust upon any man who studied the Chinese language. Why
should he unless he were a missionary or a Chinese Secretary at the
Legation? You could hire an interpreter for twenty-five dollars a month
and it was well known that all those fellows who went in for Chinese
grew queer in the head. They were all persons of consequence. There was
number one at Jardine's with his wife, and the manager of the Hong-Kong
and Shanghai Bank with his wife, the A.P.C. man and his wife, and the
B.A.T. man with his wife, and the B.&S. man with his wife. They wore
their evening clothes a little uneasily as though they wore them from a
sense of duty to their country rather than as a comfortable change from
day dress. They had come to the party because they had nothing else in
the world to do, but when the moment came that they could decently take
their leave they would go with a sigh of relief. They were bored to
death with one another.




VII

THE ALTAR OF HEAVEN


It stands open to the sky, three round terraces of white marble, placed
one above the other, which are reached by four marble staircases, and
these face the four points of the compass. It represents the celestial
sphere with its cardinal points. A great park surrounds it and this
again is surrounded by high walls. And hither, year after year, on the
night of the winter solstice, for then heaven is reborn, generation
after generation came the Son of Heaven solemnly to worship the
original creator of his house. Escorted by princes and the great men
of the realm, followed by his troops, the emperor purified by fasting
proceeded to the altar. And here awaited him princes and ministers
and mandarins, each in his allotted place, musicians and the dancers
of the sacred dance. In the scanty light of the great torches the
ceremonial robes were darkly splendid. And before the tablet on which
were inscribed the words: Imperial Heaven--Supreme Emperor, he offered
incense, jade, and silk, broth and rice spirit. He knelt and knocked
his forehead against the marble pavement nine times.

And here at the very spot where the vice-regent of heaven and earth
knelt down, Willard B. Untermeyer wrote his name in a fine bold hand
and the town and state he came from, Hastings, Nebraska. So he sought
to attach his fleeting personality to the recollection of that grandeur
of which some dim rumour had reached him. He thought that so men
would remember him when he was no more. He aimed in this crude way
at immortality. But vain are the hopes of men. For no sooner had he
sauntered down the steps than a Chinese caretaker who had been leaning
against the balustrade, idly looking at the blue sky, came forward,
spat neatly on the spot where Willard B. Untermeyer had written, and
with his foot smeared his spittle over the name. In a moment no trace
remained that Willard B. Untermeyer had ever visited that place.




VIII

THE SERVANTS OF GOD


They were sitting side by side, two missionaries, talking to one
another of perfectly trivial things, in the way people talk who wish
to show each other civility but have nothing in common; and they would
have been surprised to be told that they had certainly one admirable
thing in common, goodness, for both had this also in common, humility;
though perhaps in the Englishman it was more deliberate, and so, if
more conspicuous less natural, than it was in the Frenchman. Otherwise
the contrasts between them were almost ludicrous. The Frenchman was
hard on eighty, a tall man, still unbent; and his large bones suggested
that in youth he had been a man of uncommon strength. Now his only sign
of power lay in his eyes, immensely large so that you could not help
noticing their strange expression, and flashing. That is an epithet
often applied to eyes, but I do not think I have ever seen any to which
it might be applied so fitly. There was really a flame in them and
they seemed to emit light. They had a wildness which hardly suggested
sanity. They were the eyes of a prophet in Israel. His nose was large
and aggressive, his chin was firm and square. At no time could he
have been a man to trifle with, but in his prime he must have been
terrific. Perhaps the passion of his eyes bespoke battles long fought
out in the uttermost depths of his heart, and his soul cried out in
them, vanquished and bleeding, yet triumphant, and he exulted in the
unclosed wound which he offered in willing sacrifice to Almighty God.
He felt the cold in his old bones and he wore wrapped about him like
a soldier's cloak a great fur and on his head a cap of Chinese sable.
He was a magnificent figure. He had been in China for half a century
and thrice he had fled for his life when the Chinese had attacked his
mission.

"I trust they won't attack it again," he said, smiling, "for I am too
old now to make these precipitate journeys." He shrugged his shoulders:
"_Je serai martyr_."

He lit a long black cigar and puffed it with great enjoyment.

The other was very much younger, he could not have been more than
fifty, and he had not been in China for more than twenty years. He
was a member of the English Church Mission and he was dressed in a
grey tweed suit and a spotted tie. He sought to look as little like
a clergyman as possible. He was a little taller than the average,
but he was so fat that he looked stumpy. He had a round good-natured
face, with red cheeks and a grey moustache of the variety known as
toothbrush. He was very bald, but with a pardonable and touching vanity
he had grown his hair long enough on one side to be brought over the
scalp and so give himself at all events the illusion that his head was
well-covered. He was a jovial fellow, with a hearty laugh, and it rang
out loudly, honest and true, when he chaffed his friends or was chaffed
by them. He had the humour of a schoolboy and you could imagine him
shaking in all his bulk when someone slipped on a piece of orange peel.
But the laughter would be stopped, and he would redden, as it struck
him suddenly that the man who slipped might have hurt himself, and then
he would be all kindness and sympathy. For it was impossible to be with
him for ten minutes without realising the tenderness of his heart. You
felt that it would be impossible to ask him to do anything he would
not gladly do, and if perhaps at first his heartiness would make it
difficult to go to him in your spiritual needs you could be sure in
all practical affairs of his attention, sympathy, and good sense. He
was a man whose purse was always open to the indigent and whose time
was always at the service of those who wanted it. And yet perhaps it
is unjust to say that in the affairs of the soul his help would not
be very effectual, for though he could not speak to you, like the old
Frenchman, with the authority of a church that has never admitted
doubt or with the compelling fire of the ascetic, he would share your
distress with such a candid sympathy, consoling you with his own
hesitations, less a minister of God then than a halting, tremulous man
of the same flesh as yourself, who sought to share with you the hope
and the consolation with which his own soul was refreshed, that perhaps
in his own way he had something as good to offer as the other.

His story was a little unusual. He had been a soldier and he was
pleased to talk of the old days when he had hunted with the Quorn and
danced through the London season. He had no unhealthy feeling of past
sin.

"I was a great dancer in my young days," he said, "but I expect I
should be quite out of it now with all these new dances."

It was a good life so long as it lasted and though he did not for a
moment regret it, he had no feeling of resentment for it. The call had
come when he was in India. He did not exactly know how or why, it had
just come, a sudden feeling that he must give up his life to bringing
the heathen to the belief in Christ, but it was a feeling that he could
not resist; it gave him no peace. He was a happy man now, enjoying his
work.

"It's a slow business," he said, "but I see signs of progress and I
love the Chinese. I wouldn't change my life here for any in the world."

The two missionaries said good-bye to one another.

"When are you going home?" asked the Englishman.

"_Moi?_ Oh, in a day or two."

"I may not see you again then. I expect to go home in March."

But one meant the little town with its narrow streets where he had
lived for fifty years, since when he left France, a young man, he left
it for ever; but the other meant the Elizabethan house in Cheshire,
with its smooth lawns and its oak trees, where his ancestors had dwelt
for three centuries.




IX

THE INN


It seems long since the night fell, and for an hour a coolie has
walked before your chair carrying a lantern. It throws a thin circle
of light in front of you, and as you pass you catch a pale glimpse
(like a thing of beauty emerging vaguely from the ceaseless flux of
common life) of a bamboo thicket, a flash of water in a rice field, or
the heavy darkness of a banyan. Now and then a belated peasant bearing
two heavy baskets on his yoke sidles by. The bearers walk more slowly,
but after the long day they have lost none of their spirit, and they
chatter gaily; they laugh, and one of them breaks into a fragment of
tuneless song. But the causeway rises and the lantern throws its light
suddenly on a whitewashed wall: you have reached the first miserable
houses that straggle along the path outside the city wall, and two or
three minutes more bring you to a steep flight of steps. The bearers
take them at a run. You pass through the city gates. The narrow streets
are multitudinous and in the shops they are busy still. The bearers
shout raucously. The crowd divides and you pass through a double hedge
of serried curious people. Their faces are impassive and their dark
eyes stare mysteriously. The bearers, their day's work done, march
with a swinging stride. Suddenly they stop, wheel to the right, into a
courtyard, and you have reached the inn. Your chair is set down.

The inn--it consists of a long yard, partly covered, with rooms opening
on it on each side--is lit by three or four oil lamps. They throw a dim
light immediately around them, but make the surrounding darkness more
impenetrable. All the front of the yard is crowded with tables and at
these people are packed, eating rice or drinking tea. Some of them play
games you do not know. At the great stove, where water in a cauldron is
perpetually heating and rice in a huge pan being prepared, stand the
persons of the inn. They serve out rapidly great bowls of rice and fill
the teapots which are incessantly brought them. Further back a couple
of naked coolies, sturdy, thickset and supple, are sluicing themselves
with boiling water. You walk to the end of the yard where, facing
the entrance but protected from the vulgar gaze by a screen, is the
principal guest chamber.

It is a spacious, windowless room, with a floor of trodden earth,
lofty, for it goes the whole height of the inn, with an open roof. The
walls are whitewashed, showing the beams, so that they remind you of a
farmhouse in Sussex. The furniture consists of a square table, with a
couple of straight-backed wooden arm-chairs, and three or four wooden
pallets covered with matting on the least dirty of which you will
presently lay your bed. In a cup of oil a taper gives a tiny point of
light. They bring you your lantern and you wait while your dinner is
cooked. The bearers are merry now that they have set down their loads.
They wash their feet and put on clean sandals and smoke their long
pipes.

How precious then is the inordinate length of your book (for you are
travelling light and you have limited yourself to three) and how
jealously you read every word of every page so that you may delay as
long as possible the dreaded moment when you must reach the end! You
are mightily thankful then to the authors of long books and when you
turn over their pages, reckoning how long you can make them last, you
wish they were half as long again. You do not ask then for the perfect
lucidity which he who runs may read. A complicated phraseology which
makes it needful to read the sentence a second time to get its meaning
is not unwelcome; a profusion of metaphor, giving your fancy ample
play, a richness of allusion affording you the delight of recognition,
are then qualities beyond price. Then if the thought is elaborate
without being profound (for you have been on the road since dawn and of
the forty miles of the day's journey you have footed it more than half)
you have the perfect book for the occasion.

But the noise in the inn suddenly increases to a din and looking out
you see that more travellers, a party of Chinese in sedan chairs, have
arrived. They take the rooms on each side of you and through the thin
walls you hear their loud talking far into the night. With a lazy,
restful eye, your whole body conscious of the enjoyment of lying in
bed, taking a sensual pleasure in its fatigue, you follow the elaborate
pattern of the transom. The dim lamp in the yard shines through the
torn paper with which it is covered, and its intricate design is black
against the light. At last everything is quiet but for a man in the
next room who is coughing painfully. It is the peculiar, repeated
cough of phthisis, and hearing it at intervals through the night you
wonder how long the poor devil can live. You rejoice in your own rude
strength. Then a cock crows loudly, just behind your head, it seems;
and not far away a bugler blows a long blast on his bugle, a melancholy
wail; the inn begins to stir again; lights are lit, and the coolies
make ready their loads for another day.




X

THE GLORY HOLE


It is a sort of little cubicle in a corner of the chandler's store
just under the ceiling and you reach it by a stair which is like a
ship's companion. It is partitioned off from the shop by matchboarding,
about four feet high, so that when you sit on the wooden benches that
surround the table you can see into the shop with all its stores. Here
are coils of rope, oilskins, heavy sea-boots, hurricane lamps, hams,
tinned goods, liquor of all sorts, curios to take home to your wife and
children, clothes, I know not what. There is everything that a foreign
ship can want in an Eastern port. You can watch the Chinese, salesmen
and customers, and they have a pleasantly mysterious air as though
they were concerned in nefarious business. You can see who comes into
the shop and since it is certainly a friend bid him join you in the
Glory Hole. Through the wide doorway you see the sun beating down on
the stone pavement of the roadway and the coolies scurrying past with
their heavy loads. At about midday the company begins to assemble,
two or three pilots, Captain Thompson and Captain Brown, old men who
have sailed the China Seas for thirty years and now have a comfortable
billet ashore, the skipper of a tramp from Shanghai, and the taipans of
one or two tea firms. The boy stands silently waiting for orders and he
brings the drinks and the dice-box. Talk flows rather prosily at first.
A boat was wrecked the other day going in to Foochow, that fellow
Maclean, the engineer of the An-Chan has made a pot of money in rubber
lately, the consul's wife is coming out from home in the _Empress_; but
by the time the dice-box has travelled round the table and the loser
has signed the chit, the glasses are empty and the dice-box is reached
for once more. The boy brings the second round of drinks. Then the
tongues of these stolid, stubborn men are loosened a little and they
begin to talk of the past. One of the pilots knew the port first hard
on fifty years ago. Ah, those were the great days.

"That's when you ought to have seen the Glory Hole," he says, with a
smile.

Those were the days of the tea clippers, when there would be thirty
or forty ships in the harbour, waiting for their cargo. Everyone had
plenty of money to spend then, and the Glory Hole was the centre of
life in the port. If you wanted to find a man, why, you came to the
Glory Hole, and if he wasn't there he'd be sure to come along soon.
The agents did their business with the skippers there, and the doctor
didn't have office hours; he went to the Glory Hole at noon and if
anyone was sick he attended to him there and then. Those were the days
when men knew how to drink. They would come at midday and drink all
through the afternoon, a boy bringing them a bite if they were hungry,
and drink all through the night. Fortunes were lost and won in the
Glory Hole, for they were gamblers then and a man would risk all the
profits of his run in a game of cards. Those were the good old days.
But now the trade was gone, the tea clippers no longer thronged the
harbour, the port was dead, and the young men, the young men of the
A.P.C. or of Jardine's, turned up their noses at the Glory Hole. And
as the old pilot talked that dingy little cubicle with its stained
table seemed to be for a moment peopled with those old skippers, hardy,
reckless, and adventurous, of a day that has gone for ever.




XI

FEAR


I was staying a night with him on the road. The mission stood on a
little hill just outside the gates of a populous city. The first thing
I noticed about him was the difference of his taste. The missionary's
house as a rule is furnished in a style which is almost an outrage to
decency. The parlour, with its air of an unused room, is papered with
a gaudy paper, and on the wall hang texts, engravings of sentimental
pictures--_The Soul's Awakening_ and Luke Filde's _The Doctor_--or, if
the missionary has been long in the country, congratulatory scrolls
on stiff red paper. There is a Brussels carpet on the floor, rocking
chairs if the household is American and a stiff arm-chair on each side
of the fireplace if it is English. There is a sofa which is so placed
that nobody sits on it and by the grim look of it few can want to.
There are lace curtains on the windows. Here and there are occasional
tables on which are photographs and what-nots with modern porcelain on
them. The dining-room has an appearance of more use, but almost the
whole of it is taken up by a large table and when you sit at it you
are crowded into the fireplace. But in Mr. Wingrove's study there were
books from floor to ceiling, a table littered with papers, curtains of
a rich green stuff, and over the fireplace a Tibetan banner. There was
a row of Tibetan Buddhas on the chimney piece.

"I don't know how it is, but you've got just the feeling of college
rooms about the place," I said.

"Do you think so?" he answered. "I was a tutor at Oriel for some time."

He was a man of nearly fifty, I should think, tall and well-covered
though not stout, with grey hair cut very short and a reddish face. One
imagined that he must be a jovial man fond of laughter, an easy talker
and a good fellow; but his eyes disconcerted you: they were grave and
unsmiling; they had a look that I could only describe as harassed. I
wondered if I had fallen upon him at an inconvenient moment when his
mind was taken up with irksome matters, yet somehow I felt that this
was not a passing expression, but a settled one rather, and I could
not understand it. He had just that look of anxiety which you see in
certain forms of heart disease. He chatted about one thing and another,
then he said:

"I hear my wife come in. Shall we go into the drawing-room?"

He led me in and introduced me to a little thin woman, with gold-rimmed
spectacles and a shy manner. It was plain that she belonged to a
different class from her husband. The missionaries for the most part
with all manner of virtues have not those which we can find no better
way to describe than under the category of good breeding. They may be
saints but they are not often gentlemen. Now it struck me that Mr.
Wingrove was a gentleman, for it was evident that his wife was not a
lady. She had a vulgar intonation. The drawing-room was furnished in
a way I had never before seen in a missionary's house. There was a
Chinese carpet on the floor. Chinese pictures, old ones, hung on the
yellow walls. Two or three Ming tiles gave a dash of colour. In the
middle of the room was a blackwood table, elaborately carved, and on it
was a figure in white porcelain. I made a trivial remark.

"I don't much care for all these Chinese things meself," answered my
hostess briskly, "but Mr. Wingrove's set on them. I'd clear them all
out if I had my way."

I laughed, not because I was amused, and then I caught in Mr.
Wingrove's eyes a flash of icy hatred. I was astonished. But it passed
in a moment.

"We won't have them if you don't like them, my dear," he said gently.
"They can be put away."

"Oh, I don't mind them if they please you."

We began to talk about my journey and in the course of conversation
I happened to ask Mr. Wingrove how long it was since he had been in
England.

"Seventeen years," he said.

I was surprised.

"But I thought you had one year's furlough every seven?"

"Yes, but I haven't cared to go."

"Mr. Wingrove thinks it's bad for the work to go away for a year like
that," explained his wife. "Of course I don't care to go without him."

I wondered how it was that he had ever come to China. The actual
details of the call fascinate me, and often enough you find people who
are willing to talk of it, though you have to form your own opinion
on the matter less from the words they say than from the implications
of them; but I did not feel that Mr. Wingrove was a man who would
be induced either directly or indirectly to speak of that intimate
experience. He evidently took his work very seriously.

"Are there other foreigners here?" I asked.

"No."

"It must be very lonely," I said.

"I think I prefer it so," he answered, looking at one of the pictures
on the wall. "They'd only be business people, and you know"--he
smiled--"they haven't much use for missionaries. And they're not so
intellectual that it is a great hardship to be deprived of their
company."

"And of course we're not really alone, you know," said Mrs. Wingrove.
"We have two evangelists and then there are two young ladies who teach.
And there are the school children."

Tea was brought in and we gossiped desultorily. Mr. Wingrove seemed
to speak with effort, and I had increasingly that feeling in him of
perturbed repression. He had pleasing manners and was certainly trying
to be cordial and yet I had a sense of effort. I led the conversation
to Oxford, mentioning various friends whom he might know, but he gave
me no encouragement.

"It's so long since I left home," he said, "and I haven't kept up with
anyone. There's a great deal of work in a mission like this and it
absorbs one entirely."

I thought he was exaggerating a little, so I remarked:

"Well, by the number of books you have I take it that you get a certain
amount of time for reading."

"I very seldom read," he answered with abruptness, in a voice that I
knew already was not quite his own.

I was puzzled. There was something odd about the man. At last, as was
inevitable, I suppose, he began to talk of the Chinese. Mrs. Wingrove
said the same things about them that I had already heard so many
missionaries say. They were a lying people, untrustworthy, cruel, and
dirty, but a faint light was visible in the East; though the results
of missionary endeavour were not very noteworthy as yet, the future
was promising. They no longer believed in their old gods and the power
of the literati was broken. It is an attitude of mistrust and dislike
tempered by optimism. But Mr. Wingrove mitigated his wife's strictures.
He dwelt on the good-nature of the Chinese, on their devotion to their
parents and on their love for their children.

"Mr. Wingrove won't hear a word against the Chinese," said his wife,
"he simply loves them."

"I think they have great qualities," he said. "You can't walk through
those crowded streets of theirs without having that impressed on you."

"I don't believe Mr. Wingrove notices the smells," his wife laughed.

At that moment there was a knock at the door and a young woman came in.
She had the long skirts and the unbound feet of the native Christian,
and on her face a look that was at once cringing and sullen. She said
something to Mrs. Wingrove. I happened to catch sight of Mr. Wingrove's
face. When he saw her there passed over it an expression of the most
intense physical repulsion, it was distorted as though by an odour that
nauseated him, and then immediately it vanished and his lips twitched
to a pleasant smile; but the effort was too great and he showed only a
tortured grimace. I looked at him with amazement. Mrs. Wingrove with an
"excuse me" got up and left the room.

"That is one of our teachers," said Mr. Wingrove in that same set voice
which had a little puzzled me before. "She's invaluable. I put infinite
reliance on her. She has a very fine character."

Then, I hardly know why, in a flash I saw the truth; I saw the disgust
in his soul for all that his will loved. I was filled with the
excitement which an explorer may feel when after a hazardous journey he
comes upon a country with features new and unexpected. Those tortured
eyes explained themselves, the unnatural voice, the measured restraint
with which he praised, that air he had of a hunted man. Notwithstanding
all he said he hated the Chinese with a hatred beside which his wife's
distaste was insignificant. When he walked through the teeming streets
of the city it was an agony to him, his missionary life revolted him,
his soul was like the raw shoulders of the coolies and the carrying
pole burnt the bleeding wound. He would not go home because he could
not bear to see again what he cared for so much, he would not read his
books because they reminded him of the life he loved so passionately,
and perhaps he had married that vulgar wife in order to cut himself off
more resolutely from a world that his every instinct craved for. He
martyred his tortured soul with a passionate exasperation.

I tried to see how the call had come. I think that for years he had
been completely happy in his easy ways at Oxford; and he had loved
his work, with its pleasant companionship, his books, his holidays in
France and Italy. He was a contented man and asked nothing better than
to spend the rest of his days in just such a fashion; but I know not
what obscure feeling had gradually taken hold of him that his life
was too lazy, too contented; I think he was always a religious man
and perhaps some early belief, instilled into him in childhood and
long forgotten, of a jealous God who hated his creatures to be happy
on earth, rankled in the depths of his heart; I think because he was
so well satisfied with his life he began to think it was sinful. A
restless anxiety seized him. Whatever he thought with his intelligence
his instincts began to tremble with the dread of eternal punishment. I
do not know what put the idea of China into his head, but at first he
must have thrust it aside with violent repulsion; and perhaps the very
violence of his repulsion impressed the idea on him, for he found it
haunting him. I think he said that he would not go, but I think he felt
that he would have to. God was pursuing him and wherever he hid himself
God followed. With his reason he struggled, but with his heart he was
caught. He could not help himself. At least he gave in.

I knew I should never see him again and I had not the time to spend on
the commonplaces of conversation before a reasonable familiarity would
permit me to talk of more intimate matters. I seized the opportunity
while we were still alone.

"Tell me," I said, "do you believe God will condemn the Chinese to
eternal punishment if they don't accept Christianity?"

I am sure my question was crude and tactless, for the old man in him
tightened his lips. But nevertheless he answered.

"The whole teaching of the gospel forces one to that conclusion. There
is not a single argument which people have adduced to the contrary
which has the force of the plain words of Jesus Christ."




XII

THE PICTURE


I do not know whether he was a mandarin bound for the capital of the
province, or some student travelling to a seat of learning, nor what
the reason that delayed him in the most miserable of all the miserable
inns in China. Perhaps one or other of his bearers, hidden somewhere
to smoke a pipe of opium (for it is cheap in that neighborhood and
you must be prepared for trouble with your coolies) could not be
found. Perhaps a storm of torrential rain had held him for an hour an
unwilling prisoner.

The room was so low that you could easily touch the rafters with your
hand. The mud walls were covered with dirty whitewash, here and there
worn away, and all round on wooden pallets were straw beds for the
coolies who were the inn's habitual guests. The sun alone enabled
you to support the melancholy squalor. It shone through the latticed
window, a beam of golden light, and threw on the trodden earth of the
floor a pattern of an intricate and splendid richness.

And here to pass an idle moment he had taken his stone tablet and
mixing a little water with the stick of ink which he rubbed on it,
seized the fine brush with which he executed the beautiful characters
of the Chinese writing (he was surely proud of his exquisite
calligraphy and it was a welcome gift which he made his friends when
he sent them a scroll on which was written a maxim, glitteringly
compact, of the divine Confucius) and with a bold hand he drew on the
wall a branch of plum-blossom and a bird perched on it. It was done
very lightly, but with an admirable ease; I know not what happy chance
guided the artist's touch, for the bird was all a-quiver with life and
the plum-blossoms were tremulous on their stalks. The soft airs of
spring blew through the sketch into that sordid chamber, and for the
beating of a pulse you were in touch with the Eternal.




XIII

HER BRITANNIC MAJESTY'S REPRESENTATIVE


He was a man of less than middle height, with stiff brown hair _en
brosse_, a little toothbrush moustache, and glasses through which
his blue eyes, looking at you aggressively, were somewhat distorted.
There was a defiant perkiness in his appearance which reminded you of
the cock-sparrow, and as he asked you to sit down and inquired your
business, meanwhile sorting the papers littered on his desk as though
you had disturbed him in the midst of important affairs, you had the
feeling that he was on the look out for an opportunity to put you in
your place. He had cultivated the official manner to perfection. You
were the public, an unavoidable nuisance, and the only justification
for your existence was that you did what you were told without argument
or delay. But even officials have their weakness and somehow it chanced
that he found it very difficult to bring any business to an end without
confiding his grievance to you. It appeared that people, missionaries
especially, thought him supercilious and domineering. He assured you
that he thought there was a great deal of good in missionaries; it is
true that many of them were ignorant and unreasonable, and he didn't
like their attitude; in his district most of them were Canadians, and
personally he didn't like Canadians; but as for saying that he put
on airs of superiority (he fixed his pince-nez more firmly on his
nose) it was monstrously untrue. On the contrary he went out of his
way to help them, but it was only natural that he should help them in
his way rather than in theirs. It was hard to listen to him without
a smile, for in every word he said you felt how exasperating he must
be to the unfortunate persons over whom he had control. His manner
was deplorable. He had developed the gift of putting up your back
to a degree which is very seldom met with. He was in short a vain,
irritable, bumptious, and tiresome little man.

During the revolution, while a lot of firing was going on in the
city between the rival factions, he had occasion to go to the
Southern general on official business connected with the safety of
his nationals, and on his way through the yamen he came across three
prisoners being led out to execution. He stopped the officer in charge
of the firing party and finding out what was about to happen vehemently
protested. These were prisoners of war and it was barbarity to kill
them. The officer--very rudely, in the consul's words--told him that he
must carry out his orders. The consul fired up. He wasn't going to let
a confounded Chinese officer talk to him in that way. An altercation
ensued. The general informed of what was occurring sent out to ask
the consul to come in to him, but the consul refused to move till the
prisoners, three wretched coolies green with fear, were handed over to
his safe-keeping. The officer waved him aside and ordered his firing
squad to take aim. Then the consul--I can see him fixing his glasses
on his nose and his hair bristling fiercely--then the consul stepped
forwards between the levelled rifles and the three miserable men, and
told the soldiers to shoot and be damned. There was hesitation and
confusion. It was plain that the rebels did not want to shoot a British
consul. I suppose there was a hurried consultation. The three prisoners
were given over to him and in triumph the little man marched back to
the consulate.

"Damn it, Sir," he said furiously, "I almost thought the blighters
would have the confounded cheek to shoot me."

They are strange people the British. If their manners were as good
as their courage is great they would merit the opinion they have of
themselves.




XIV

THE OPIUM DEN


On the stage it makes a very effective set. It is dimly lit. The room
is low and squalid. In one corner a lamp burns mysteriously before a
hideous image and incense fills the theatre with its exotic scent. A
pig-tailed Chinaman wanders to and fro, aloof and saturnine, while on
wretched pallets lie stupefied the victims of the drug. Now and then
one of them breaks into frantic raving. There is a highly dramatic
scene where some poor creature, unable to pay for the satisfaction of
his craving, with prayers and curses begs the villainous proprietor for
a pipe to still his anguish. I have read also in novels descriptions
which made my blood run cold. And when I was taken to an opium den
by a smooth-spoken Eurasian the narrow, winding stairway up which he
led me prepared me sufficiently to receive the thrill I expected. I
was introduced into a neat enough room, brightly lit, divided into
cubicles the raised floor of which, covered with clean matting, formed
a convenient couch. In one an elderly gentleman, with a grey head
and very beautiful hands, was quietly reading a newspaper, with his
long pipe by his side. In another two coolies were lying, with a pipe
between them, which they alternately prepared and smoked. They were
young men, of a hearty appearance, and they smiled at me in a friendly
way. One of them offered me a smoke. In a third four men squatted over
a chess-board, and a little further on a man was dandling a baby (the
inscrutable Oriental has a passion for children) while the baby's
mother, whom I took to be the landlord's wife, a plump, pleasant-faced
woman, watched him with a broad smile on her lips. It was a cheerful
spot, comfortable, home-like, and cosy. It reminded me somewhat of the
little intimate beer-houses of Berlin where the tired working man could
go in the evening and spend a peaceful hour. Fiction is stranger than
fact.




XV

THE LAST CHANCE


It was pathetically obvious that she had come to China to be married,
and what made it almost tragic was that not a single man in the treaty
port was ignorant of the fact. She was a big woman with an ungainly
figure; her hands and feet were large; she had a large nose, indeed
all her features were large; but her blue eyes were fine. She was
perhaps a little too conscious of them. She was a blonde and she was
thirty. In the daytime when she wore sensible boots, a short skirt,
and a slouch hat, she was personable; but in the evening, in blue silk
to enhance the colour of her eyes, in a frock cut by heaven knows what
suburban dressmaker from the models in an illustrated paper, when she
set herself out to be alluring she was an object that made you horribly
ill-at-ease. She wished to be all things to all unmarried men. She
listened brightly while one of them talked of shooting and she listened
gaily when another talked of the freight on tea. She clapped her hands
with girlish excitement when they discussed the races which were to
be run next week. She was desperately fond of dancing, with a young
American, and she made him promise to take her to a baseball match; but
dancing wasn't the only thing she cared for (you can have too much of a
good thing) and, with the elderly, but single, taipan of an important
firm, what she simply loved was a game of golf. She was willing to be
taught billiards by a young man who had lost his leg in the war and she
gave her sprightly attention to the manager of a bank who told her what
he thought of silver. She was not much interested in the Chinese, for
that was a subject which was not very good form in the circles in which
she found herself, but being a woman she could not help being revolted
at the way in which Chinese women were treated.

"You know, they don't have a word to say about who they're going to
marry," she explained. "It's all arranged by go-betweens and the man
doesn't even see the girl till he's married her. There's no romance or
anything like that. And as far as love goes ..."

Words failed her. She was a thoroughly good-natured creature. She would
have made any of those men, young or old, a perfectly good wife. And
she knew it.




XVI

THE NUN


The convent lay white and cool among the trees on the top of a hill;
and as I stood at the gateway, waiting to be let in, I looked down
at the tawny river glittering in the sunlight and at the rugged
mountains beyond. It was the Mother Superior who received me, a placid,
sweet-faced lady with a soft voice and an accent which told me that
she came from the South of France. She showed me the orphans who were
in her charge, busy at the lace-making which the nuns had taught them,
smiling shyly; and she showed me the hospital where lay soldiers
suffering from dysentery, typhoid, and malaria. They were squalid and
dirty. The Mother Superior told me she was a Basque. The mountains
that she looked out on from the convent windows reminded her of the
Pyrenees. She had been in China for twenty years. She said that it was
hard sometimes never to see the sea; here on the great river they were
a thousand miles away from it; and because I knew the country where she
was born she talked to me a little of the fine roads that led over the
mountains--ah, they did not have them here in China--and the vineyards
and the pleasant villages with their running streams that nestled at
the foot of the hills. But the Chinese were good people. The orphans
were very quick with their fingers and they were industrious; the
Chinese sought them as wives because they had learnt useful things in
the convent, and even after they were married they could earn a little
money by their needles. And the soldiers too, they were not so bad as
people said; after all _les pauvres petits_, they did not want to be
soldiers; they would much sooner be at home working in the fields.
Those whom the sisters had nursed through illness were not devoid
of gratitude. Sometimes when they were coming along in a chair and
overtook two nuns who had been in the town to buy things and were laden
with parcels, they would offer to take their parcels in the chair. _Au
fond_, they were not bad hearted.

"They do not go so far as to get out and let the nuns ride in their
stead?" I asked.

"A nun in their eyes is only a woman," she smiled indulgently. "You
must not ask from people more than they are capable of giving."

How true, and yet how hard to remember!




XVII

HENDERSON


It was very hard to look at him without a chuckle, for his appearance
immediately told you all about him. When you saw him at the club,
reading _The London Mercury_ or lounging at the bar with a gin and
bitters at his elbow (no cocktails for him) his unconventionality
attracted your attention; but you recognised him at once, for he was a
perfect specimen of his class. His unconventionality was exquisitely
conventional. Everything about him was according to standard, from his
square-toed, serviceable boots to his rather long, untidy hair. He wore
a loose low collar that showed a thick neck and loose, somewhat shabby
but well-cut clothes. He always smoked a short briar pipe. He was
very humorous on the subject of cigarettes. He was a biggish fellow,
athletic, with fine eyes and a pleasant voice. He talked fluently.
His language was often obscene, not because his mind was impure, but
because his bent was democratic. As you guessed by the look of him he
drank beer (not in fact but in the spirit) with Mr. Chesterton and
walked the Sussex downs with Mr. Hilaire Belloc. He had played football
at Oxford, but with Mr. Wells he despised the ancient seat of learning.
He looked upon Mr. Bernard Shaw as a little out of date, but he had
still great hopes of Mr. Granville Barker. He had had many serious
talks with Mr. and Mrs. Sydney Webb, and he was a member of the Fabian
Society. The only point where he touched upon the same world as the
frivolous was his appreciation of the Russian Ballet. He wrote rugged
poems about prostitutes, dogs, lamp-posts, Magdalen College, public
houses and country vicarages. He held English, French, and Americans
in scorn; but on the other hand (he was no misanthropist) he would not
listen to a word in dispraise of Tamils, Bengalis, Kaffirs, Germans, or
Greeks. At the club they thought him rather a wild fellow.

"A socialist, you know," they said.

But he was junior partner in a well-known and respectable firm, and
one of the peculiarities of China is that your position excuses your
idiosyncrasies. It may be notorious that you beat your wife, but if
you are manager of a well-established bank the world will be civil to
you and ask you to dinner. So when Henderson announced his socialistic
opinions they merely laughed. When he first came to Shanghai he refused
to use the jinrickshaw. It revolted his sense of personal dignity that
a man, a human being no different from himself, should drag him hither
and thither. So he walked. He swore it was good exercise and it kept
him fit; besides, it gave him a thirst he wouldn't sell for twenty
dollars, and he drank his beer with gusto. But Shanghai is very hot and
sometimes he was in a hurry so now and again he was obliged to use the
degrading vehicle. It made him feel uncomfortable, but it was certainly
convenient. Presently he came to use it frequently, but he always
thought of the boy between the shafts as a man and a brother.

He had been three years in Shanghai when I saw him. We had spent the
morning in the Chinese city, going from shop to shop and our rickshaw
boys were hot with sweat; every minute or two they wiped their
foreheads with ragged handkerchiefs. We were bound now for the club and
had nearly reached it when Henderson remembered that he wanted to get
Mr. Bertrand Russell's new book, which had just reached Shanghai. He
stopped the boys and told them to go back.

"Don't you think we might leave it till after luncheon?" I said. "Those
fellows are sweating like pigs."

"It's good for them," he answered. "You mustn't ever pay attention to
the Chinese. You see, we're only here because they fear us. We're the
ruling race."

I did not say anything. I did not even smile.

"The Chinese always have had masters and they always will."

A passing car separated us for a moment and when he came once more
abreast of me he had put the matter aside.

"You men who live in England don't know what it means to us when new
books get out here," he remarked. "I read everything that Bertrand
Russell writes. Have you seen the last one?"

"Roads to Freedom? Yes. I read it before I left England."

"I've read several reviews. I think he's got hold of some interesting
ideas."

I think Henderson was going to enlarge on them, but the rickshaw boy
passed the turning he should have taken.

"Round the corner, you bloody fool," cried Henderson, and to emphasize
his meaning he gave the man a smart kick on the bottom.




XVIII

DAWN


It is night still and the courtyard of the inn is rich with deep
patches of darkness. Lanterns throw fitful lights on the coolies busily
preparing their loads for the journey. They shout and laugh, angrily
argue with one another, and vociferously quarrel. I go out into the
street and walk along preceded by a boy with a lantern. Here and there
behind closed doors cocks are crowing. But in many of the shops the
shutters are down already and the indefatigable people are beginning
their long day. Here an apprentice is sweeping the floor, and there a
man is washing his hands and face. A wick burning in a cup of oil is
all his light. I pass a tavern where half a dozen persons are seated at
an early meal. The ward gate is closed, but a watchman lets me through
a postern and I walk along a wall by a sluggish stream in which are
reflected the bright stars. Then I reach the great gate of the city,
and this time one half of it is open; I pass out, and there, awaiting
me, all ghostly, is the dawn. The day and the long road and the open
country lie before me.

Put out the lantern. Behind me the darkness pales to a mist of purple
and I know that soon this will kindle to a rosy flush. I can make out
the causeway well enough and the water in the padi fields reflects
already a wan and shadowy light. It is no longer night, but it is not
yet day. This is the moment of most magical beauty, when the hills and
the valleys, the trees and the water, have a mystery which is not of
earth. For when once the sun has risen, for a time the world is very
cheerless, the light is cold and grey like the light in a painter's
studio, and there are no shadows to diaper the ground with a coloured
pattern. Skirting the brow of a wooded hill I look down on the padi
fields. But to call them fields is too grandiose. They are for the
most part crescent shaped patches built on the slope of a hill, one
below the other, so that they can be flooded. Firs and bamboos grow in
the hollows as though placed there by a skilful gardener with a sense
of ordered beauty to imitate formally the abandon of nature. In this
moment of enchantment you do not look upon the scene of humble toil,
but on the pleasure gardens of an emperor. Here throwing aside the
cares of state, he might come in yellow silk embroidered with dragons,
with jewelled bracelets on his wrists, to sport with a concubine so
beautiful that men in after ages felt it natural if a dynasty was
destroyed for her sake.

And now with the increasing day a mist arises from the padi fields and
climbs half way up the gentle hills. You may see a hundred pictures
of the sight before you, for it is one that the old masters of China
loved exceedingly. The little hills, wooded to their summit, with a
line of fir trees along the crest, a firm silhouette against the sky,
the little hills rise behind one another, and the varying level of the
mist, forming a pattern, gives the composition a completeness which
yet allows the imagination ample scope. The bamboos grow right down to
the causeway, their thin leaves shivering in the shadow of a breeze,
and they grow with a high-bred grace so that they look like groups of
ladies in the Great Ming dynasty resting languidly by the way-side.
They have been to some temple, and their silken dresses are richly
wrought with flowers and in their hair are precious ornaments of jade.
They rest there for a while on their small feet, their golden lilies,
gossiping elegantly, for do they not know that the best use of culture
is to talk nonsense with distinction; and in a moment slipping back
into their chairs they will be gone. But the road turns and my God, the
bamboos, the Chinese bamboos, transformed by some magic of the mist,
look just like the hops of a Kentish field. Do you remember the sweet
smelling hop-fields and the fat green meadows, the railway line that
runs along the sea and the long shining beach and the desolate greyness
of the English Channel? The seagull flies over the wintry coldness and
the melancholy of its cry is almost unbearable.




XIX

THE POINT OF HONOUR


Nothing hinders friendly relations between different countries so
much as the fantastic notions which they cherish about one another's
characteristics, and perhaps no nation has suffered so much from
the misconception of its neighbours as the French. They have been
considered a frivolous race, incapable of profound thought, flippant,
immoral, and unreliable. Even the virtues that have been allowed them,
their brilliancy, their gaiety, have been allowed them (at least
by the English) in a patronising way; for they were not virtues on
which the Anglo-Saxon set great store. It was never realised that
there is a deep seriousness at the bottom of the French character and
that the predominant concern of the average Frenchman is the concern
for his personal dignity. It is by no hazard that La Rochefoucauld,
a keen judge of human nature in general and of his countrymen in
particular, should have made _l'honneur_ the pivot of his system.
The punctiliousness with which our neighbours regard it has often
entertained the Briton who is accustomed to look upon himself with
humour; but it is a living force, as the phrase goes, with the
Frenchman, and you cannot hope to understand him unless you bear in
mind always the susceptibility of his sense of honour.

These reflections were suggested to me whenever I saw the Vicomte de
Steenvoorde driving in his sumptuous car or seated at the head of his
own table. He represented certain important French interests in China
and was said to have more power at the Quai d'Orsay than the minister
himself. There was never a very cordial feeling between the pair, since
the latter not unnaturally resented that one of his nationals should
deal in diplomatic matters with the Chinese behind his back. The esteem
in which M. de Steenvoorde was held at home was sufficiently proved by
the red button that adorned the lappet of his frock coat.

The Vicomte had a fine head, somewhat bald, but not unbecomingly
(_une lgre calvitie_, as the French novelists put it and thereby
rob the cruel fact of half its sting), a nose like the great Duke
of Wellington's, bright black eyes under heavy eyelids, and a small
mouth hidden by an exceedingly handsome moustache the ends of which he
twisted a great deal with white, richly jewelled fingers. His air of
dignity was heightened by three massive chins. He had a big trunk and
an imposing corpulence so that when he sat at table he sat a little
away from it, as though he ate under protest and were just there for a
snack; but nature had played a dirty, though not uncommon trick on him;
for his legs were much too short for his body so that, though seated
he had all the appearance of a tall man, you were taken aback to find
when he stood up that he was hardly of average height. It was for this
reason that he made his best effect at table or when he was driving
through the city in his car. Then his presence was commanding. When he
waved to you or with a broad gesture took off his hat, you felt that it
was incredibly affable of him to take any notice of human beings. He
had all the solid respectability of those statesmen of Louis Philippe,
in sober black, with their long hair and clean-shaven faces, who look
out at you with portentous solemnity from the canvases of Ingres.

One often hears of people who talk like a book. M. de Steenvoorde
talked like a magazine, not of course a magazine devoted to light
literature and the distraction of an idle hour, but a magazine of sound
learning and influential opinion. M. de Steenvoorde talked like the
_Revue des Deux Mondes_. It was a treat, though a little fatiguing, to
listen to him. He had the fluency of those who have said the same thing
over and over again. He never hesitated for a word. He put everything
with lucidity, an admirable choice of language, and such an authority
that in his lips the obvious had all the sparkle of an epigram. He was
by no means without wit. He could be very amusing at the expense of his
neighbours. And when, having said something peculiarly malicious, he
turned to you with an observation "_Les absents ont toujours tort_," he
managed to invest it with the freshness of an original aphorism. He was
an ardent Catholic, but, he flattered himself, no reactionary; a man of
standing, substance, and principle.

A poor man, but ambitious (fame, the last infirmity of noble mind) he
had married for her enormous dot the daughter of a sugar broker, now
a painted little lady with hennaed hair, in beautiful clothes; and it
must have been a sore trial to him that when he gave her his honoured
name he could not also endow her with the sense of personal pride which
was so powerful a motive in all his actions. For, like many great men,
M. de Steenvoorde was married to a wife who was extremely unfaithful
to him. But this misfortune he bore with a courage and a dignity which
were absolutely characteristic. His demeanour was so perfect that his
infelicity positively raised him in the eyes of his friends. He was
to all an object of sympathy. He might be a cuckold, but he remained
a person of quality. Whenever, indeed, Mme. de Steenvoorde took a new
lover he insisted that her parents should give him a sufficient sum of
money to make good the outrage to his name and honour. Common report
put it at a quarter of a million francs, but with silver at its present
price I believe that a business man would insist on being paid in
dollars. M. de Steenvoorde is already a man of means, but before his
wife reaches the canonical age he will undoubtedly be a rich one.




XX

THE BEAST OF BURDEN


At first when you see the coolie on the road, bearing his load, it
is as a pleasing object that he strikes the eye. In his blue rags, a
blue of all colours from indigo to turquoise and then to the paleness
of a milky sky, he fits the landscape. He seems exactly right as he
trudges along the narrow causeway between the rice fields or climbs
a green hill. His clothing consists of no more than a short coat and
a pair of trousers; and if he had a suit which was at the beginning
all of a piece, he never thinks when it comes to patching to choose a
bit of stuff of the same colour. He takes anything that comes handy.
From sun and rain he protects his head with a straw hat shaped like an
extinguisher with a preposterously wide, flat brim.

You see a string of coolies come along, one after the other, each with
a pole on his shoulders from the ends of which hang two great bales,
and they make an agreeable pattern. It is amusing to watch their
hurrying reflections in the padi water. You watch their faces as they
pass you. They are good-natured faces and frank, you would have said,
if it had not been drilled into you that the oriental is inscrutable;
and when you see them lying down with their loads under a banyan tree
by a wayside shrine, smoking and chatting gaily, if you have tried to
lift the bales they carry for thirty miles or more a day, it seems
natural to feel admiration for their endurance and their spirit. But
you will be thought somewhat absurd if you mention your admiration to
the old residents of China. You will be told with a tolerant shrug of
the shoulders that the coolies are animals and for two thousand years
from father to son have carried burdens, so it is no wonder if they
do it cheerfully. And indeed you can see for yourself that they begin
early, for you will encounter little children with a yoke on their
shoulders staggering under the weight of vegetable baskets.

The day wears on and it grows warmer. The coolies take off their coats
and walk stripped to the waist. Then sometimes in a man resting for an
instant, his load on the ground but the pole still on his shoulders so
that he has to rest slightly crouched, you see the poor tired heart
beating against the ribs: you see it as plainly as in some cases of
heart disease in the out-patients' room of a hospital. It is strangely
distressing to watch. Then also you see the coolies' backs. The
pressure of the pole for long years, day after day, has made hard red
scars, and sometimes even there are open sores, great sores without
bandages or dressing that rub against the wood; but the strangest
thing of all is that sometimes, as though nature sought to adapt man
for these cruel uses to which he is put, an odd malformation seems to
have arisen so that there is a sort of hump, like a camel's, against
which the pole rests. But beating heart or angry sore, bitter rain or
burning sun notwithstanding, they go on eternally, from dawn till dusk,
year in year out, from childhood to the extreme of age. You see old
men without an ounce of fat on their bodies, their skin loose on their
bones, wizened, their little faces wrinkled and apelike, with hair thin
and grey; and they totter under their burdens to the edge of the grave
in which at last they shall have rest. And still the coolies go, not
exactly running, but not walking either, sidling quickly, with their
eyes on the ground to choose the spot to place their feet, and on their
faces a strained, anxious expression. You can make no longer a pattern
of them as they wend their way. Their effort oppresses you. You are
filled with a useless compassion.

In China it is man that is the beast of burden.

"_To be harassed by the wear and tear of life, and to pass rapidly
through it without the possibility of arresting one's course,--is not
this pitiful indeed? To labour without ceasing, and then, without
living to enjoy the fruit, worn out, to depart, suddenly, one knows not
whither,--is not that a just cause for grief?_"

So wrote the Chinese mystic.




XXI

DR. MACALISTER


He was a fine figure of a man, hard upon sixty, I should think, when
I knew him, but hale still and active. He was stout, but his great
height enabled him to carry his corpulence with dignity. He had a
strong, almost a handsome face, with a hooked nose, bushy white
eyebrows and a firm chin. He was dressed in black, and he wore a low
collar and a white bow tie. He had the look of an English divine of
a past generation. His voice was resonant and hearty, and he laughed
boisterously.

His career was somewhat out of the common. He had come to China
thirty years before as a medical missionary, but now, though still
on good terms with the mission, he was no longer a member. It had
been decided, it appears, to build a school on a certain desirable
spot which the doctor had hit upon, and in a crowded Chinese city
it is never very easy to find building land, but when the mission
after much bargaining had eventually bought this the discovery was
made that the owner was not the Chinese with whom the negotiations
had been conducted, but the doctor himself. Knowing that the school
must be built and seeing that no other piece of land was available he
had borrowed money from a Chinese banker and bought it himself. The
transaction was not dishonest, but perhaps it was a little unscrupulous
and the other members of the mission did not look upon it as the good
joke that Dr. Macalister did. They displayed even a certain acrimony,
and the result was that Dr. Macalister, though preserving friendly
relations with persons with whose aims and interests he was in the
fullest sympathy, resigned his position. He was known to be a clever
doctor and he soon had a large practice both among the foreigners and
the Chinese. He started a hostel in which the traveller, at a price,
and a high one, could have board and lodging. His guests complained
a little because they were not allowed to drink alcohol, but it was
much more comfortable than a Chinese inn, and some allowance had to be
made for the doctor's principles. He was a man of resource. He bought
a large piece of land on a hill on the other side of the river and put
up bungalows which he sold one by one to the missionaries as summer
resorts; and he owned a large store in which he sold everything, from
picture postcards and curios to Worcester sauce and knitted jumpers,
which a foreigner could possibly want. He made a very good thing out of
it. He had a commercial bent.

The tiffin he invited me to was quite an imposing function. He lived
above his store in a large apartment overlooking the river. The party
consisted of Dr. Macalister and his third wife, a lady of forty-five
in gold-rimmed spectacles and black satin, a missionary spending
a few days with the doctor on his way into the interior, and two
silent young ladies who had just joined the mission and were busily
learning Chinese. On the walls of the dining-room hung a number of
congratulatory scrolls which had been presented to my host by Chinese
friends and converts on his fiftieth birthday. There was a great deal
of food, as there always is in China, and Dr. Macalister did full
justice to it. The meal began and ended with a long grace which he said
in his deep voice, with an impressive unction.

When we returned to the drawing-room Dr. Macalister, standing in front
of the grateful fire, for it can be very cold in China, took a little
photograph from the chimney piece and showed it to me.

"Do you know who that is?" he asked.

It was the photograph of a very thin young missionary in a low collar
and a white tie, with large melancholy eyes and a look of profound
seriousness.

"Nice looking fellow, eh?" boomed the doctor.

"Very," I answered.

A somewhat priggish young man possibly, but priggishness is a
pardonable defect in youth, and here it was certainly counterbalanced
by the appealing wistfulness of the expression. It was a fine, a
sensitive, and even a beautiful face, and those disconsolate eyes
were strangely moving. There was fanaticism there, perhaps, but there
was the courage that would not fear martyrdom; there was a charming
idealism; and its youth, its ingenuousness, warmed one's heart.

"A most attractive face," I said as I returned the photograph.

Dr. Macalister gave a chuckle.

"That's what I looked like when I first came out to China," he said.

It was a photograph of himself.

"No one recognises it," smiled Mrs. Macalister.

"It was the very image of me," he said.

He spread out the tails of his black coat and planted himself more
firmly in front of the fire.

"I often laugh when I think of my first impressions of China," he
said. "I came out expecting to undergo hardships and privations. My
first shock was the steamer with ten-course dinners and first-class
accommodation. There wasn't much hardship in that, but I said to
myself: wait till you get to China. Well, at Shanghai I was met by
some friends and I stayed in a fine house and was waited on by fine
servants and I ate fine food. Shanghai, I said, the plague spot of the
East. It'll be different in the interior. At last I reached here. I was
to stay with the head of the mission till my own quarters were ready.
He lived in a large compound. He had a very nice house with American
furniture in it and I slept in a better bed than I'd ever slept in.
He was very fond of his garden and he grew all kinds of vegetables in
it. We had salads just like the salads we had in America and fruit,
all kinds of fruit; he kept a cow and we had fresh milk and butter. I
thought I'd never eaten so much and so well in my life. You did nothing
for yourself. If you wanted a glass of water you called a boy and he
brought it to you. It was the beginning of summer when I arrived and
they were all packing up to go to the hills. They hadn't got bungalows
then, but they used to spend the summer in a temple. I began to think
I shouldn't have to put up with much privation after all. I had been
looking forward to a martyr's crown. Do you know what I did?"

Dr. Macalister chuckled as he thought of that long passed time.

"The first night I got here, when I was alone in my room, I threw
myself on my bed and I just cried like a child."

Dr. Macalister went on talking, but I could not pay much attention to
what he said. I wondered by what steps he had come to be the man I knew
now from the man he had been then. That is the story I should like to
write.




XXII

THE ROAD


It is not a road at all but a causeway, made of paving stones about a
foot wide and four feet broad so that there is just room for two sedan
chairs with caution to pass each other. For the most part it is in good
enough repair, but here and there the stones are broken or swept away
by the flooding of the rice fields, and then walking is difficult. It
winds tortuously along the path which has connected city to city since
first a thousand years ago or more there were cities in the land. It
winds between the rice fields following the accidents of the country
with a careful nonchalance; and you can tell that it was built on a
track made by the peasant of dim ages past who sought not the quickest
but the easiest way to walk. The beginnings of it you may see when,
leaving the main road you cut across country, bound for some town that
is apart from the main line of traffic. Then the causeway is so narrow
that there is no room for a coolie bearing a load to pass and if you
are in the midst of the rice fields he has to get on the little bank,
planted with beans, that divides one from another, till you go by.
Presently the stones are wanting and you travel along a path of trodden
mud so narrow that your bearers step warily.

The journey, for all the stories of bandits with which they sought
to deter you, and the ragged soldiers of your escort, is devoid of
adventure; but it is crowded with incident. First there is the constant
variety of the dawn. Poets have written of it with enthusiasm, but
they are lie-a-beds, and they have trusted for inspiration to their
fancy rather than to their sleepy eyes. Like a mistress known in the
dream of a moonlit night who has charms unshared by the beauties of the
wakeful day, they have ascribed to it excellencies which are only of
the imagination. For the most exquisite dawn has none of the splendour
of an indifferent sunset. But because it is a less accustomed sight it
seems to have a greater diversity. Every dawn is a little different
from every other, and you can fancy that each day the world is created
anew not quite the same as it was the day before.

Then there are the common sights of the way-side. A peasant, thigh
deep in water, ploughs his field with a plough as primitive as those
his fathers have used for forty mortal centuries. The water buffalo
splashes sinister through the mud and his cynical eyes seem to ask
what end has been served by this unending toil. An old woman goes by
in her blue smock and short blue trousers, on bound feet, and she
supports her unsteady steps with a long staff. Two fat Chinese in
chairs pass you, and passing stare at you with curious yet listless
eyes. Everyone you see is an incident, however trivial, sufficient to
arouse your fancy for an instant; and now your eyes rest with pleasure
on the smooth skin, like yellow ivory, of a young mother sauntering
along with a child strapped to her back, on the wrinkled, inscrutable
visage of an old man, or on the fine bones, visible through the flesh
of the face, of a strapping coolie. And beside all this there is the
constant delight with which, having climbed laboriously a hill, you
see the country spread out before you. For days and days it is just
the same, but each time you see it you have the same little thrill
of discovery. The same little rounded hills, like a flock of sheep,
surrounding you, succeeding one another as far as the eye can reach;
and on many, a lone tree, as though planted deliberately for the sake
of the picturesque, outlines its gracious pattern against the sky. The
same groves of bamboo lean delicately, almost surrounding the same
farm houses, which with their clustering roofs nestle pleasantly in
the same sheltered hollows. The bamboos lean over the highway with
an adorable grace. They have the condescension of great ladies which
flatters rather than wounds. They have the abandon of flowers, a
well-born wantonness that is too sure of its good breeding ever to be
in danger of debauchery. But the memorial arch, to virtuous widow or to
fortunate scholar, warns you that you are approaching a village or a
town, and you pass, affording a moment's sensation to the inhabitants,
through a ragged line of sordid hovels or a busy street. The street
is shaded from the sun by great mats stretched from eave to eave; the
light is dim and the thronging crowd has an unnatural air. You think
that so must have looked the people in those cities of magicians
which the Arab traveller knew, and where during the night a terrible
transformation befell you so that till you found the magic formula to
free you, you went through life in the guise of a one-eyed ass or of
a green and yellow parrot. The merchants in their open shops seem to
sell no common merchandise and in the taverns messes are prepared of
things horrible for men to eat. Your eye, amid the uniformity, for
every Chinese town, at all events to the stranger's eye, much resembles
every other, takes pleasure in noting trivial differences, and so you
observe the predominant industries of each one. Every town makes all
that its inhabitants require, but it has also a speciality, and here
you will find cotton cloth, there string, and here again silk. Now the
orange tree, golden with fruit, grows scarce and the sugar cane makes
its appearance. The black silk cap gives way to the turban and the red
umbrella of oiled paper to the umbrella of bright blue cotton.

But these are the common incidents of every day. They are like the
expected happenings of life which keep it from monotony, working days
and holidays, meetings with your friends, the coming of spring with
its elation and the coming of winter with its long evenings, its easy
intimacies and its twilight. Now and then, as love enters making all
the rest but a setting for its radiance and lifts the common affairs of
the day to a level on which the most trifling things have a mysterious
significance, now and then the common round is interrupted and you are
faced by a beauty which takes your soul, all unprepared, by assault.
For looming through the mist you may see the fantastic roofs of a
temple loftily raised on a huge stone bastion, around which, a natural
moat, flows a quiet green river, and when the sun lights it you seem
to see the dream of a Chinese palace, a palace as rich and splendid
as those which haunted the fancy of the Arabian story tellers; or,
crossing a ferry at dawn you may see, a little above you, silhouetted
against the sunrise, a sampan in which a ferryman is carrying a crowd
of passengers; you recognise on a sudden Charon, and you know that his
passengers are the melancholy dead.




XXIII

GOD'S TRUTH


Birch was the agent of the B.A.T. and he was stationed in a little town
of the interior with streets which, after it had rained, were a foot
deep in mud. Then you had to get right inside your cart to prevent
yourself from being splashed from head to foot. The roadway, worn to
pieces by the ceaseless traffic, was so full of holes that the breath
was jolted out of your body as you jogged along at a foot pace. There
were two or three streets of shops, but he knew by heart everything
that was in them; and there were interminable winding alleys which
presented a monotonous expanse of wall broken only by solid closed
doors. These were the Chinese houses and they were as impenetrable
to one of his colour as the life which surrounded him. He was very
homesick. He had not spoken to a white man for three months.

His day's work was over. Since he had nothing else to do he went for
the only walk there was. He went out of the city gate and strolled
along the ragged road, with its deep ruts, into the country. The valley
was bounded by wild, barren mountains and they seemed to shut him in.
He felt immeasurably far away from civilisation. He knew he could not
afford to surrender to that sense of utter loneliness which beset him,
but it was more of an effort than usual to keep a stiff upper lip. He
was very nearly at the end of his tether. Suddenly he saw a white man
riding towards him on a pony. Behind came slowly a Chinese cart in
which presumably were his belongings. Birch guessed at once that this
was a missionary going down to one of the treaty-ports from his station
further up country, and his heart leaped with joy. At last he would
have some one to talk to. He hurried his steps. His lassitude left him.
He was all alert. He was almost running when he came up to the rider.

"Hulloa," he said, "where have you sprung from?"

The rider stopped and named a distant town.

"I am on my way down to take the train," he added.

"You'd better put up with me for the night. I haven't seen a white man
for three months. There's lots of room at my place. B.A.T. you know."

"B.A.T.," said the rider. His face changed and his eyes, before
friendly and smiling, grew hard. "I don't want to have anything to do
with you."

He gave his pony a kick and started on, but Birch seized the bridle. He
could not believe his ears.

"What do you mean?"

"I can't have anything to do with a man who trades in tobacco. Let go
that bridle."

"But I've not spoken to a white man for three months."

"That's no business of mine. Let go that bridle."

He gave his pony another kick. His lips were obstinately set and he
looked at Birch sternly. Then Birch lost his temper. He clung to the
bridle as the pony moved on and began to curse the missionary. He
hurled at him every term of abuse he could think of. He swore. He was
horribly obscene. The missionary did not answer, but urged his pony on.
Birch seized the missionary's leg and jerked it out of the stirrup;
the missionary nearly fell off and he clung in a somewhat undignified
fashion to the pony's mane. Then he half slipped, half tumbled to
the ground. The cart had come up to them by now and stopped. The two
Chinese who were sitting in it looked at the white men with indolent
curiosity. The missionary was livid with rage.

"You've assaulted me. I'll have you fired for that."

"You can go to hell," said Birch. "I haven't seen a white man for
three months and you won't even speak to me. Do you call yourself a
Christian?"

"What is your name?"

"Birch is my name and be damned to you."

"I shall report you to your chief. Now stand back and let me get on my
journey."

Birch clenched his hands.

"Get a move on or I'll break every bone in your body."

The missionary mounted, gave his pony a sharp cut with the whip, and
cantered away. The Chinese cart lumbered slowly after. But when Birch
was left alone his anger left him and a sob broke unwillingly from his
lips. The barren mountains were less hard than the heart of man. He
turned and walked slowly back to the little walled city.




XXIV

ROMANCE


All day I had been dropping down the river. This was the river up which
Chang Chien, seeking its source, had sailed for many days till he came
to a city where he saw a girl spinning and a youth leading an ox to
the water. He asked what place this was and in reply the girl gave him
her shuttle telling him to show it on his return to the astrologer
Yen Chn-ping, who would thus know where he had been. He did so and
the astrologer at once recognised the shuttle as that of the Spinning
Damsel, further declaring that on the day and at the hour when Chang
Chien received the shuttle he had noticed a wandering star intrude
itself between the Spinning Damsel and the Cowherd. So Chang Chien knew
that he had sailed upon the bosom of the Milky Way.

I, however, had not been so far. All day, as for seven days before, my
five rowers, standing up, had rowed, and there rang still in my ears
the monotonous sound of their oars against the wooden pin that served
as rowlock. Now and again the water became very shallow and there was
a jar and a jolt as we scraped along the stones of the river bed. Then
two or three of the rowers turned up their blue trousers to the hip and
let themselves over the side. Shouting they dragged the flat-bottomed
boat over the shoal. Now and again we came to a rapid, of no great
consequence when compared with the turbulent rapids of the Yangtze, but
sufficiently swift to call for trackers to pull the junks that were
going up stream; and we, going down, passed through them with many
shouts, shot the foaming breakers and presently reached water as smooth
as any lake.

Now it was night and my crew were asleep, forward, huddled together in
such shelter as they had been able to rig up when we moored at dusk.
I sat on my bed. Bamboo matting spread over three wooden arches made
the sorry cabin which for a week had served me as parlour and bedroom.
It was closed at one end by matchboarding so roughly put together
that there were large chinks between each board. The bitter wind blew
through them. It was on the other side of this that the crew--fine
sturdy fellows--rowed by day and slept by night, joined then by the
steersman who had stood from dawn to dusk, in a tattered blue gown and
a wadded coat of faded grey, a black turban round his head, at the long
oar which was his helm. There was no furniture but my bed, a shallow
dish like an enormous soup-plate in which burned charcoal, for it was
cold, a basket containing my clothes which I used as a table, and a
hurricane lamp which hung from one of the arches and swayed slightly
with the motion of the water. The cabin was so low that I, a person of
no great height (I comfort myself with Bacon's observation that with
tall men it is as with tall houses, the top story is commonly the least
furnished) could only just stand upright. One of the sleepers began to
snore more loudly, and perhaps he awoke two of the others, for I heard
the sound of speaking; but presently this ceased, the snorer was quiet,
and all about me once more was silence.

Then suddenly I had a feeling that here, facing me, touching me almost,
was the romance I sought. It was a feeling like no other, just as
specific as the thrill of art; but I could not for the life of me tell
what it was that had given me just then that rare emotion.

In the course of my life I have been often in situations which, had
I read of them, would have seemed to me sufficiently romantic; but
it is only in retrospect, comparing them with my ideas of what was
romantic, that I have seen them as at all out of the ordinary. It
is only by an effort of the imagination, making myself as it were a
spectator of myself acting a part, that I have caught anything of the
precious quality in circumstances which in others would have seemed to
me instinct with its fine flower. When I have danced with an actress
whose fascination and whose genius made her the idol of my country, or
wandered through the halls of some great house in which was gathered
all that was distinguished by lineage or intellect that London could
show, I have only recognized afterwards that here perhaps, though in
somewhat Ouidaesque a fashion, was romance. In battle, when, myself in
no great danger, I was able to watch events with a thrill of interest,
I had not the phlegm to assume the part of a spectator. I have sailed
through the night, under the full moon, to a coral island in the
Pacific, and then the beauty and the wonder of the scene gave me a
conscious happiness, but only later the exhilarating sense that romance
and I had touched fingers. I heard the flutter of its wings when once,
in the bedroom of a hotel in New York, I sat round a table with half a
dozen others and made plans to restore an ancient kingdom whose wrongs
have for a century inspired the poet and the patriot; but my chief
feeling was a surprised amusement that through the hazards of war I
found myself engaged in business so foreign to my bent. The authentic
thrill of romance has seized me under circumstances which one would
have thought far less romantic, and I remember that I knew it first one
evening when I was playing cards in a cottage on the coast of Brittany.
In the next room an old fisherman lay dying and the women of the house
said that he would go out with the tide. Without a storm was raging and
it seemed fit for the last moments of that aged warrior of the seas
that his going should be accompanied by the wild cries of the wind as
it hurled itself against the shuttered windows. The waves thundered
upon the tortured rocks. I felt a sudden exultation, for I knew that
here was romance.

And now the same exultation seized me, and once more romance, like a
bodily presence, was before me. But it had come so unexpectedly that
I was intrigued. I could not tell whether it had crept in among the
shadows that the lamp threw on the bamboo matting or whether it was
wafted down the river that I saw through the opening of my cabin.
Curious to know what were the elements that made up the ineffable
delight of the moment I went out to the stern of the boat. Alongside
were moored half a dozen junks, going up river, for their masts were
erect; and everything was silent in them. Their crews were long since
asleep. The night was not dark, for though it was cloudy the moon was
full, but the river in that veiled light was ghostly. A vague mist
blurred the trees on the further bank. It was an enchanting sight, but
there was in it nothing unaccustomed and what I sought was not there. I
turned away. But when I returned to my bamboo shelter the magic which
had given it so extraordinary a character was gone. Alas, I was like
a man who should tear a butterfly to pieces in order to discover in
what its beauty lay. And yet, as Moses descending from Mount Sinai wore
on his face a brightness from his converse with the God of Israel, my
little cabin, my dish of charcoal, my lamp, even my camp bed, had still
about them something of the thrill which for a moment was mine. I could
not see them any more quite indifferently, because for a moment I had
seen them magically.




XXV

THE GRAND STYLE


He was a very old man. It was fifty-seven years since he came to China
as a ship's doctor and took the place in one of the Southern ports of a
medical officer whose health had obliged him to go home. He could not
then have been less than twenty-five so that now he must have been well
over eighty. He was a tall man, very thin, and his skin hung on his
bones like a suit of clothes much too large for him: under his chin was
a great sack like the wattle of an old turkey-cock; but his blue eyes,
large and bright, had kept their colour, and his voice was strong and
deep. In these seven and fifty years he had bought and sold three or
four practices along the coast and now he was back once more within a
few miles of the port in which he had first lived. It was an anchorage
at the mouth of the river where the steamers, unable owing to their
draught to reach the city, discharged and loaded their cargo. There
were only seven white men's houses, a small hospital, and a handful
of Chinese, so that it would not have been worth a doctor's while to
settle there; but he was vice-consul as well, and the easy life at his
great age just suited him. There was enough to do to prevent him from
feeling idle, but not enough to tire him. His spirit was still hale.

"I'm thinking of retiring," he said, "it's about time I gave the
youngsters a chance."

He amused himself with plans for the future: all his life he had wanted
to visit the West Indies and upon his soul he meant to now. By George,
Sir, he couldn't afford to leave it much longer. England? Well, from
all he heard England was no place for a gentleman nowadays. He was
last there thirty years ago. Besides he wasn't English. He was born in
Ireland. Yes, Sir, he took his degree at Trinity College, Dublin; but
what with the priests on one side and the Sinn Feiners on the other he
could not believe there was much left of the Ireland he knew as a boy.
A fine country to hunt in, he said, with a gleam in his open blue eyes.

He had better manners than are usually found in the medical profession
which, though blest with many virtues, neglects somewhat the amenities
of polite behaviour. I do not know whether it is commerce with the sick
which gives the doctor an unfortunate sense of superiority; the example
of his teachers some of whom have still a bad tradition of rudeness
which certain eminent practitioners of the past cultivated as a
professional asset; or his early training among the poor patients of a
hospital whom he is apt to look upon as of a lower class than himself;
but it is certain that no body of men is on the whole so wanting in
civility.

He was very different from the men of my generation; but whether the
difference lay in his voice and gesture, in the ease of his manner,
or in the elaborateness of his antique courtesy, it was not easy to
discover. I think he was more definitely a gentleman than people are
nowadays when a man is a gentleman with deprecation. The word is in bad
odour and the qualities it denotes have come in for a deal of ridicule.
Persons who by no stretch of the fancy could be so described have made
a great stir in the world during the last thirty years and they have
used all the resources of their sarcasm to render odious a title which
they are perhaps all too conscious of never deserving. Perhaps also the
difference in him was due to a difference of education. In his youth
he had been taught much useless learning, the classics of Greece and
Rome, and they had given a foundation to his character which in the
present is somewhat rare. He was young in an age which did not know the
weekly press and when the monthly magazine was a staid affair. Reading
was more solid. Perhaps men drank more than was good for them, but
they read Horace for pleasure and they knew by heart the novels of Sir
Walter Scott. He remembered reading _The Newcomes_ when it came out.
I think the men of that time were, if not more adventurous than the
men of ours, more adventurous in the grand manner: now a man will risk
his life with a joke from _Comic Cuts_ on his lips, then it was with a
Latin quotation.

But how can I analyse the subtle quality which distinguished this old
man? Read a page of Swift: the words are the same as those we use
to-day and there is hardly a sentence in which they are not placed in
the simplest order; and yet there is a dignity, a spaciousness, an
aroma, which all our modern effort fails to attain: in short there is
style. And so with him; there was style, and there is no more to be
said.




XXVI

RAIN


Yes, but the sun does not shine every day. Sometimes a cold rain beats
down on you and a northeast wind chills you to the bone. Your shoes and
your coat are wet still from the day before and you have three hours
to go before breakfast. You tramp along in the cheerless light of that
bitter dawn, with thirty miles before you and nothing to look forward
to at the end but the squalid discomfort of a Chinese inn. There you
will find bare walls, a clammy floor of trodden earth, and you will dry
yourself as best you can over a dish of burning charcoal.

Then you think of your pleasant room in London. The rain driving in
squalls against the windows only makes its warmth more grateful. You
sit by the fire, your pipe in your mouth, and read the _Times_ from
cover to cover, not the leading articles of course but the agony
column and the advertisements of country houses you will never be
able to afford. (On the Chiltern Hills, standing in its own park of
one hundred and fifty acres, with spacious garden, orchard, etc., a
Georgian house in perfect condition, with original woodwork and chimney
pieces, six reception rooms, fourteen bedrooms and usual offices,
modern sanitation, stabling with rooms over and excellent garage. Three
miles from first rate golf course.) I know then that Messrs. Knight,
Frank, and Rutley are my favourite authors. The matters that they treat
of like the great commonplaces which are the material of all fine
poetry never stale; and their manner like that of the best masters is
characteristic but at the same time various. Their style, as is that
of Confucius according to the sinologues, is glitteringly compact:
succinct but suggestive it combines an admirable exactness with a
breadth of image which gives the imagination an agreeable freedom.
Their mastery of words such as rood and perch of which I suppose I once
knew the meaning but which for many years have been a mystery to me,
is amazing, and they will use them with ease and assurance. They can
play with technical terms with the ingenuity of Mr. Rudyard Kipling
and they can invest them with the Celtic glamour of Mr. W.B. Yeats.
They have combined their individualities so completely that I defy the
most discerning critic to discover traces of a divided authorship.
Literary history is acquainted with the collaboration of two writers,
and the names of Beaumont and Fletcher, Erckman Chatrian, Besant and
Rice spring to the excited fancy; but now that the higher criticism has
destroyed that belief in the triple authorship of the Bible which I was
taught in my youth, I conjecture that the case of Knight, Frank and
Rutley is unique.

Then Elizabeth, very smart in the white squirrel I brought her from
China, comes in to say good-bye to me, for she, poor child, must go
out whatever the weather, and I play trains with her while her pram
is being got ready. Then of course I should do a little work, but the
weather is so bad that I feel lazy, and I take up instead Professor
Giles' book on Chuang-Tzu. The rigid Confucianists frown upon him
because he is an individualist, and it is to the individualism of the
age that they ascribe the lamentable decay of China, but he is very
good reading; he has the advantage on a rainy day that he can be read
without great application and not seldom you come across a thought that
sets your own wandering. But presently ideas, insinuating themselves
into your consciousness like the lapping waves of a rising tide, absorb
you to the exclusion of those which old Chuang-Tzu suggested, and
notwithstanding your desire to idle, you sit down at your table. Only
the dilettante uses a desk. Your pen goes easily and you write without
effort. It is very good to be alive. Then two amusing people come to
luncheon and when they are gone you drop into Christie's. You see some
Ming figures there, but they are not so good as those you brought from
China yourself, and then you watch being sold pictures you are only too
glad not to possess. You look at your watch; there is pretty sure to be
a rubber going at the Garrick, and the shocking weather justifies you
in wasting the rest of the afternoon. You cannot stay very late, for
you have seats for a first night and you must get home and dress for an
early dinner. You will be just in time to tell Elizabeth a little story
before she goes to sleep. She looks really very nice in her pyjamas
with her hair done up in two plaits. There is something about a first
night which only the satiety of the critic can fail to be moved by. It
is pleasant to see your friends and amusing to hear the pit's applause
when a favourite of the stage, acting, better than she ever does
behind the footlights, a delightful embarrassment at being recognised,
advances to take her seat. It may be a bad play that you are going to
see, but it has at least the merit that no one has seen it before; and
there is always the chance of a moment's emotion or of a smile.

Towards you in their great straw hats, like the hat of love-sick
Pierrot, but with a huge brim, come a string of coolies, lolloping
along, bent forward a little under the weight of the great bales of
cotton that they carry. The rain plasters their blue clothes, so thin
and ragged, against their bodies. The broken stones of the causeway are
slippery, and with toil you pick your muddy way.




XXVII

SULLIVAN


He was an Irish sailor. He deserted his ship at Hong-Kong and took it
into his head to walk across China. He spent three years wandering
about the country, and soon acquired a very good knowledge of Chinese.
He learned it, as is common among men of his class, with greater ease
than do the more highly educated. He lived on his wits. He made a point
of avoiding the British Consul, but went to the magistrate of each town
he came to and represented himself as having been robbed on the way
of all his money. His story was not improbable and it was told with a
wealth of convincing detail which would have excited the admiration
of so great a master as Captain Costigan. The magistrate, after the
Chinese fashion, was anxious to get rid of him and was glad to do so
at the cost of ten or fifteen dollars. If he could get no money he
could generally count on a place to sleep in and a good meal. He had
a certain rough humour which appealed to the Chinese. So he continued
very successfully till he hit by misfortune on a magistrate of a
different stamp. This man when he told his story said to him:

"You are nothing but a beggar and a vagabond. You must be beaten."

He gave an order and the fellow was promptly taken out, thrown on the
ground, and soundly thrashed. He was not only very much hurt, but
exceedingly surprised, and what is more strangely mortified. It ruined
his nerve. There and then he gave up his vagrant life and making his
way to one of the out-ports applied to the commissioner of customs
for a place as tide-waiter. It is not easy to find white men to take
such posts and few questions are asked of those who seek them. He was
given a job and you may see him now, a sun-burned, clean-shaven man of
forty-five, florid and rather stout, in a neat blue uniform, boarding
the steamers and the junks at a little riverside town, where the
deputy-commissioner, the postmaster, a missionary, and he are the only
Europeans. His knowledge of the Chinese and their ways makes him an
invaluable servant. He has a little yellow wife and four children. He
has no shame about his past and over a good stiff whisky he will tell
you the whole story of his adventurous travels. But the beating is what
he can never get over. It surprises him yet and he cannot, he simply
cannot understand it. He has no ill-feeling towards the magistrate who
ordered it; on the contrary it appeals to his sense of humour.

"He was a great old sportsman, the old blackguard," he says. "Nerve,
eh?"




XXVIII

THE DINING-ROOM


It was an immense room in an immense house. When it was built, building
was cheap, and the merchant princes of that day built magnificently.
Money was made easily then and life was luxurious. It was not hard
to make a fortune and a man, almost before he had reached middle
age, could return to England and live the rest of his days no less
splendidly in a fine house in Surrey. It is true that the population
was hostile and it was always possible that a riot might make it
necessary for him to fly for his life, but this only added a spice
to the comfort of his existence; and when danger threatened it was
fairly certain that a gunboat would arrive in time to offer protection
or refuge. The foreign community, largely allied by marriage, was
sociable, and its members entertained one another lavishly. They gave
pompous dinner parties, they danced together, and they played whist.
Work was not so pressing that it was impossible to spend now and again
a few days in the interior shooting duck. It was certainly very hot in
summer, and after a few years a man was apt to take things easily, but
the rest of the year was only warm, with blue skies and a balmy air,
and life was very pleasant. There was a certain liberty of behaviour
and no one was thought the worse of, so long as the matter was not
intruded on the notice of the ladies, if he had to live with him a
little bright-eyed Chinese girl. When he married he sent her away
with a present and if there were children they were provided for at a
Eurasian school in Shanghai.

But this agreeable life was a thing of the past. The port lived on its
export of tea and the change of taste from Chinese to Ceylon had ruined
it. For thirty years the port had lain a-dying. Before that the consul
had had two vice-consuls to help him in his work, but now he was able
to do it easily by himself. He generally managed to get a game of golf
in the afternoon and he was seldom too busy for a rubber of bridge.
Nothing remained of the old splendour but the enormous hongs, and they
were mostly empty. The tea merchants, such as were left of them, turned
their hands to all manner of side lines in the effort to make both ends
meet. But the effort was listless. Everyone in the port seemed old. It
was no place for a young man.

And in the room in which I sat I seemed to read the history of the
past and the history of the man I was awaiting. It was Sunday morning
and when I arrived after two days on a coasting steamer, he was in
church. I tried to construct a portrait of him from the room. There
was something pathetic about it. It had the magnificence of a past
generation, but a magnificence run to seed, and its tidiness, I know
not why, seemed to emphasize a shame-faced poverty. On the floor was a
huge Turkey carpet which in the seventies must have cost a great deal
of money, but now it was quite threadbare. The immense mahogany table,
at which so many good dinners had been eaten, with such a luxury of
wine, was so highly polished that you could see your face in it. It
suggested port, old and tawny, and prosperous, red faced gentlemen
with side whiskers discussing the antics of the mountebank Disraeli.
The walls were of that sombre red which was thought suitable for a
dining room when dinner was a respectable function and they were heavy
with pictures. Here were the father and mother of my host, an elderly
gentleman with grey whiskers and a bald head and a stern dark old
lady with her hair dressed in the fashion of the Empress Eugenie, and
there his grandfather in a stock and his grandmother in a mob cap. The
mahogany sideboard with a mirror at the back, was laden with plated
salvers, and a tea service, and much else, while in the middle of the
dining table stood an immense pergne. On the black marble chimney
piece was a black marble clock, flanked by black marble vases, and in
the four corners of the room were cabinets filled with all manner of
plated articles. Here and there great palms in pots spread their stiff
foliage. The chairs were of massive mahogany, stuffed, and covered with
faded red leather, and on each side of the fireplace was an arm-chair.
The room, large though it was, seemed crowded, but because everything
was rather shabby it gave you an impression of melancholy. All those
things seemed to have a sad life of their own, but a life subdued,
as though the force of circumstances had proved too much for them.
They had no longer the strength to struggle against fate, but they
clung together with a tremulous eagerness as though they had a vague
feeling that only so could they retain their significance, and I felt
that it was only a little time before the end came when they would lie
haphazard, in an unlovely confusion, with little numbers pasted on
them, in the dreary coldness of an auction room.




XXIX

ARABESQUE


There in the mist, enormous, majestic, silent, and terrible, stood
the Great Wall of China. Solitarily, with the indifference of nature
herself, it crept up the mountain side and slipped down to the depth of
the valley. Menacingly, the grim watch towers, stark and foursquare,
at due intervals stood at their posts. Ruthlessly, for it was built at
the cost of a million lives and each one of those great grey stones
has been stained with the bloody tears of the captive and the outcast,
it forged its dark way through a sea of rugged mountains. Fearlessly,
it went on its endless journey, league upon league to the furthermost
regions of Asia, in utter solitude, mysterious like the great empire it
guarded. There in the mist, enormous, majestic, silent, and terrible,
stood the Great Wall of China.




XXX

THE CONSUL


Mr. Pete was in a state of the liveliest exasperation. He had been
in the consular service for more than twenty years and he had had to
deal with all manner of vexatious people, officials who would not
listen to reason, merchants who took the British Government for a debt
collecting agency, missionaries who resented as gross injustice any
attempt at fair play; but he never recollected a case which had left
him more completely at a loss. He was a mild-mannered man, but for no
reason he flew into a passion with his writer and he very nearly sacked
the Eurasian clerk because he had wrongly spelt two words in a letter
placed before him for his official signature. He was a conscientious
man and he could not persuade himself to leave his office before the
clock struck four, but the moment it did he jumped up and called for
his hat and stick. Because his boy did not bring them at once he
abused him roundly. They say that the consuls all grow a little odd;
and the merchants who can live for thirty-five years in China without
learning enough of the language to ask their way in the street, say
that it is because they have to study Chinese; and there was no doubt
that Mr. Pete was decidedly odd. He was a bachelor and on that account
had been sent to a series of posts which by reason of their isolation
were thought unsuited to married men. He had lived so much alone that
his natural tendency to eccentricity had developed to an extravagant
degree, and he had habits which surprised the stranger. He was very
absent-minded. He paid no attention to his house, which was always in
great disorder, nor to his food; his boys gave him to eat what they
liked and for everything he had made him pay through the nose. He was
untiring in his efforts to suppress the opium traffic, but he was the
only person in the city who did not know that his servants kept opium
in the consulate itself, and a busy traffic in the drug was openly
conducted at the back door of the compound. He was an ardent collector
and the house provided for him by the government was filled with the
various things which he had collected one after the other, pewter,
brass, carved wood; these were his more legitimate enterprises; but he
also collected stamps, birds' eggs, hotel labels, and postmarks: he
boasted that he had a collection of postmarks which was unequalled in
the Empire. During his long sojourning in lonely places he had read a
great deal, and though he was no sinologue he had a greater knowledge
of China, its history, literature, and people, than most of his
colleagues; but from his wide reading he had acquired not toleration
but vanity. He was a man of a singular appearance. His body was small
and frail and when he walked he gave you the idea of a dead leaf
dancing before the wind; and then there was something extraordinarily
odd in the small Tyrolese hat, with a cock's feather in it, very
old and shabby, which he wore perched rakishly on the side of his
large head. He was exceedingly bald. You saw that his eyes, blue and
pale, were weak behind the spectacles, and a drooping, ragged, dingy
moustache did not hide the peevishness of his mouth. And now, turning
out of the street in which was the consulate, he made his way on to the
city wall, for there only in the multitudinous city was it possible to
walk with comfort.

He was a man who took his work hardly, worrying himself to death over
every trifle, but as a rule a walk on the wall soothed and rested him.
The city stood in the midst of a great plain and often at sundown from
the wall you could see in the distance the snow-capped mountains,
the mountains of Tibet; but now he walked quickly, looking neither
to the right nor to the left, and his fat spaniel frisked about him
unobserved. He talked to himself rapidly in a low monotone. The cause
of his irritation was a visit that he had that day received from a lady
who called herself Mrs. Y and whom he with a consular passion for
precision insisted on calling Miss Lambert. This in itself sufficed to
deprive their intercourse of amenity. She was an Englishwoman married
to a Chinese. She had arrived two years before with her husband from
England where he had been studying at the University of London; he
had made her believe that he was a great personage in his own country
and she had imagined herself to be coming to a gorgeous palace and
a position of consequence. It was a bitter surprise when she found
herself brought to a shabby Chinese house crowded with people: there
was not even a foreign bed in it, nor a knife and fork: everything
seemed to her very dirty and smelly. It was a shock to find that she
had to live with her husband's father and mother and he told her that
she must do exactly what his mother bade her; but in her complete
ignorance of Chinese it was not till she had been two or three days in
the house that she realised that she was not her husband's only wife.
He had been married as a boy before he left his native city to acquire
the knowledge of the barbarians. When she bitterly upbraided him for
deceiving her he shrugged his shoulders. There was nothing to prevent
a Chinese from having two wives if he wanted them and, he added with
some disregard to truth, no Chinese woman looked upon it as a hardship.
It was upon making this discovery that she paid her first visit to the
consul. He had already heard of her arrival--in China everyone knows
everything about everyone--and he received her without surprise. Nor
had he much sympathy to show her. That a foreign woman should marry a
Chinese at all filled him with indignation, but that she should do so
without making proper inquiries vexed him like a personal affront. She
was not at all the sort of woman whose appearance led you to imagine
that she would be guilty of such a folly. She was a solid, thick-set,
young person, short, plain, and matter of fact. She was cheaply dressed
in a tailor-made suit and she wore a Tam-o'-shanter. She had bad teeth
and a muddy skin. Her hands were large and red and ill cared for. You
could tell that she was not unused to hard work. She spoke English with
a Cockney whine.

"How did you meet Mr. Y?" asked the consul frigidly.

"Well, you see, it's like this," she answered. "Dad was in a very good
position, and when he died mother said: 'Well, it seems a sinful waste
to keep all these rooms empty, I'll put a card in the window.'"

The consul interrupted her.

"He had lodgings with you?"

"Well, they weren't exactly lodgings," she said.

"Shall we say apartments then?" replied the consul, with his thin,
slightly vain smile.

That was generally the explanation of these marriages. Then because
he thought her a very foolish vulgar woman he explained bluntly that
according to English law she was not married to Y and that the best
thing she could do was to go back to England at once. She began to
cry and his heart softened a little to her. He promised to put her in
charge of some missionary ladies who would look after her on the long
journey, and indeed, if she liked, he would see if meanwhile she could
not live in one of the missions. But while he talked Miss Lambert dried
her tears.

"What's the good of going back to England?" she said at last. "I
'aven't got nowhere to go to."

"You can go to your mother."

"She was all against my marrying Mr. Y. I should never hear the last
of it if I was to go back now."

The consul began to argue with her, but the more he argued the more
determined she became, and at last he lost his temper.

"If you like to stay here with a man who isn't your husband it's your
own look out, but I wash my hands of all responsibility."

Her retort had often rankled.

"Then you've got no cause to worry," she said, and the look on her face
returned to him whenever he thought of her.

That was two years ago and he had seen her once or twice since then.
It appeared that she got on very badly both with her mother-in-law and
with her husband's other wife, and she had come to the consul with
preposterous questions about her rights according to Chinese law. He
repeated his offer to get her away, but she remained steadfast in her
refusal to go, and their interview always ended in the consul's flying
into a passion. He was almost inclined to pity the rascally Y who
had to keep the peace between three warring women. According to his
English wife's account he was not unkind to her. He tried to act fairly
by both his wives. Miss Lambert did not improve. The consul knew that
ordinarily she wore Chinese clothes, but when she came to see him she
put on European dress. She was become extremely blowsy. Her health
suffered from the Chinese food she ate and she was beginning to look
wretchedly ill. But really he was shocked when she had been shown into
his office that day. She wore no hat and her hair was dishevelled. She
was in a highly hysterical state.

"They're trying to poison me," she screamed and she put before him a
bowl of some foul smelling food. "It's poisoned," she said. "I've been
ill for the last ten days, it's only by a miracle I've escaped."

She gave him a long story, circumstantial and probable enough to
convince him: after all nothing was more likely than that the Chinese
women should use familiar methods to get rid of an intruder who was
hateful to them.

"Do they know you've come here?"

"Of course they do; I told them I was going to show them up."

Now at last was the moment for decisive action. The consul looked at
her in his most official manner.

"Well, you must never go back there. I refuse to put up with your
nonsense any longer. I insist on your leaving this man who isn't your
husband."

But he found himself helpless against the woman's insane obstinacy.
He repeated all the arguments he had used so often, but she would not
listen, and as usual he lost his temper. It was then, in answer to
his final, desperate question, that she had made the remark which had
entirely robbed him of his calm.

"But what on earth makes you stay with the man?" he cried.

She hesitated for a moment and a curious look came into her eyes.

"There's something in the way his hair grows on his forehead that I
can't help liking," she answered.

The consul had never heard anything so outrageous. It really was the
last straw. And now while he strode along, trying to walk off his
anger, though he was not a man who often used bad language he really
could not restrain himself, and he said fiercely:

"Women are simply bloody."




XXXI

THE STRIPLING


He walked along the causeway with an easy confident stride. He was
seventeen, tall and slim, with a smooth and yellow skin that had never
known a razor. His eyes, but slightly aslant, were large and open and
his full red lips were tremulous with a smile. The happy audacity of
youth was in his bearing. His little round cap was set jauntily on
his head, his black gown was girt about his loins, and his trousers,
as a rule gartered at the ankle, were turned up to the knees. He went
barefoot but for thin straw sandals, and his feet were small and
shapely. He had walked since early morning along the paved causeway
that wound its sinuous path up the hills and down into the valleys with
their innumerable padi fields, past burial grounds with their serried
dead, through busy villages where maybe his eyes rested approvingly
for a moment on some pretty girl in her blue smock and her short blue
trousers, sitting in an open doorway (but I think his glance claimed
admiration rather than gave it), and now he was nearing the end of his
journey and the city whither he was bound seeking his fortune. It stood
in the midst of a fertile plain, surrounded by a crenellated wall,
and when he saw it he stepped forward with resolution. He threw back
his head boldly. He was proud of his strength. All his worldly goods
were wrapped up in a parcel of blue cotton which he carried over his
shoulder.

Now Dick Whittington, setting out to win fame and fortune, had a cat
for his companion, but the Chinese carried with him a round cage with
red bars, which he held with a peculiar grace between finger and thumb,
and in the cage was a beautiful green parrot.




XXXII

THE FANNINGS


They lived in a fine square house, with a verandah all round it, on
the top of a low hill that faced the river, and below them, a little
to the right, was another fine square house which was the customs;
and to this, for he was deputy commissioner, Fanning went every day.
The city was five miles away and on the river bank was nothing but a
small village which had sprung up to provide the crews of junks with
what gear or food they needed. In the city were a few missionaries but
these they saw seldom and the only foreigners in the village besides
themselves were the tide-waiters. One of these had been an able seaman
and the other was an Italian; they both had Chinese wives. The Fannings
asked them to tiffin on Christmas day and on the King's Birthday; but
otherwise their relations with them were purely official. The steamers
stayed but half an hour, so they never saw the captains or the chief
engineers who were the only white men on them, and for five months in
the year the water was too low for steamers to pass. Oddly enough it
was then they saw most foreigners, for it happened now and again that
a traveller, a merchant or consular official perhaps, more often a
missionary, going up stream by junk, tied up for the night, and then
the commissioner went down to the river and asked him to dine. They
lived very much alone.

Fanning was extremely bald, a short, thickset man, with a snub nose and
a very black moustache. He was a martinet, aggressive, brusque, with a
bullying manner; and he never spoke to a Chinese without raising his
voice to a tone of rasping command. Though he spoke fluent Chinese,
when one of his "boys" did something to displease him he abused him
roundly in English. He made a disagreeable impression on you till
you discovered that his aggressiveness was merely an armour put on
to conceal a painful shyness. It was a triumph of his will over his
disposition. His gruffness was an almost absurd attempt to persuade
those with whom he came in contact that he was not frightened of them.
You felt that no one was more surprised than himself that he was taken
seriously. He was like those little grotesque figures that children
blow out like balloons and you had an idea that he went in lively
fear of bursting and then everyone would see that he was but a hollow
bladder. It was his wife who was constantly alert to persuade him that
he was a man of iron and when the explosion was over she would say to
him:

"You know, you frighten me when you get in those passions," or "I think
I'd better say something to the boy, he's quite shaken by what you
said."

Then Fanning would puff himself up and smile indulgently. When a
visitor came she would say:

"The Chinese are terrified of my husband, but of course they respect
him. They know it's no good trying any of their nonsense with him."

"Well, I ought to know how to treat them," he would answer with
beetling brows, "I've been over twenty years in the country."

Mrs. Fanning was a little plain woman, wizened like a crab-apple, with
a big nose and bad teeth. She was always very untidy, her hair, going
a little grey, was continually on the point of falling down. Now and
then, in the midst of conversation, she would abstractedly take out
a pin or two, give it a shake, and without troubling to look in the
glass insecurely fix its few thin wisps. She had a love of brilliant
colour and she wore fantastic clothes which she and the sewing amah
ran up together from the fashion papers; but when she dressed she
could never find anything that went with anything else and she looked
like a woman who had been rescued from shipwreck and clothed in any
oddments that could be found. She was a caricature, and you could not
help smiling when you looked at her. The only attractive thing she had
was a soft and extremely musical voice and she spoke with a little
drawl which came from I know not what part of England. The Fannings
had two sons, one of nine and one of seven, and they completed the
solitary household. They were attractive children, affectionate and
demonstrative, and it was pleasant to see how united the family was.
They had little jokes together that amused them hugely, and they played
pranks with one another as though not one of them was more than ten.
Though they had so much of one another's society it really looked as
though they could not bear to be out of one another's sight, and each
day when Fanning went to his office his boys would hardly let him
go and each day when he returned they greeted him with extravagant
delight. They had no fear of his gruff bluster.

And presently you discovered that the centre of this concord was that
little, grotesque, ugly woman; it was not chance that kept the family
united, nor peculiarly agreeable dispositions, but a passion of love
in her. From the moment she got up in the morning till the time she
went to bed her thoughts were occupied with the welfare of the three
male persons who were in her charge. Her active mind was busy all the
time with schemes for their happiness. I do not think a thought of
self ever entered her untidy head. She was a miracle of unselfishness.
It was really hardly human. She never had a hard word for anyone. She
was very hospitable and it was she who caused her husband to go down
to the houseboats and invite travellers to come up to dinner. But I do
not think she wanted them for her own sake. She was quite happy in her
solitude, but she thought her husband enjoyed a talk with strangers.

"I don't want him to get in a rut," she said. "My poor husband, he
misses his billiards and his bridge. It's very hard for a man to have
no one to talk to but a woman."

Every evening when the children had been put to bed they played piquet.
She had no head for cards, poor dear, and she always made mistakes, but
when her husband upbraided her, she said:

"You can't expect everyone to be as clever as you are."

And because she so obviously meant what she said he could not find it
in his heart to be angry with her. Then when the commissioner was tired
of beating her they would turn on the gramophone and sitting side by
side listen in silence to the latest songs from the musical comedies
of London. You may turn up your nose. They lived ten thousand miles
away from England and it was their only tie with the home they loved:
it made them feel not quite so utterly cut off from civilisation. And
presently they would talk of what they would do with the children when
they grew up; soon it would be time to send them home to school and
perhaps a pang passed through the little woman's gentle heart.

"It'll be hard for you, Bertie, when they go," she said. "But perhaps
we shall be moved then to some place where there's a club and then
you'll be able to go and play bridge in the evenings."




XXXIII

THE SONG OF THE RIVER


You hear it all along the river. You hear it, loud and strong, from
the rowers as they urge the junk with its high stern, the mast lashed
alongside, down the swift running stream. You hear it from the
trackers, a more breathless chaunt, as they pull desperately against
the current, half a dozen of them perhaps if they are taking up a
wupan, a couple of hundred if they are hauling a splendid junk, its
square sail set, over a rapid. On the junk a man stands amidships
beating a drum incessantly to guide their efforts, and they pull with
all their strength, like men possessed, bent double; and sometimes in
the extremity of their travail they crawl on the ground, on all fours,
like the beasts of the field. They strain, strain fiercely, against
the pitiless might of the stream. The leader goes up and down the line
and when he sees one who is not putting all his will into the task he
brings down his split bamboo on the naked back. Each one must do his
utmost or the labour of all is vain. And still they sing a vehement,
eager chaunt, the chaunt of the turbulent waters. I do not know how
words can describe what there is in it of effort. It serves to express
the straining heart, the breaking muscles, and at the same time the
indomitable spirit of man which overcomes the pitiless force of nature.
Though the rope may part and the great junk swing back, in the end the
rapid will be passed; and at the close of the weary day there is the
hearty meal and perhaps the opium pipe with its dreams of ease. But
the most agonising song is the song of the coolies who bring the great
bales from the junk up the steep steps to the town wall. Up and down
they go, endlessly, and endless as their toil rises their rhythmic cry.
He, aw--ah, oh. They are barefoot and naked to the waist. The sweat
pours down their faces and their song is a groan of pain. It is a sigh
of despair. It is heart-rending. It is hardly human. It is the cry of
souls in infinite distress, only just musical, and that last note is
the ultimate sob of humanity. Life is too hard, too cruel, and this is
the final despairing protest. That is the song of the river.




XXXIV

MIRAGE


He is a tall man with bulging, sky blue eyes and an embarrassed manner.
He looks as though he were a little too large for his skin and you
feel that he would be more comfortable if it were a trifle looser.
His hair, very smooth and crisp, fits so tightly on his head that it
gives you the impression of a wig, and you have an almost irresistible
inclination to pull it. He has no small talk. He hunts for topics of
conversation and, racking his brain to no purpose, in desperation
offers you a whisky and soda.

He is in charge of the B.A.T., and the building in which he lives is
office, godown, and residence all in one. His parlour is furnished
with a suite of dingy upholstered furniture placed neatly round the
walls, and in the middle is a round table. A hanging petroleum lamp
gives a melancholy light, and an oil stove heat. In appropriate places
are richly framed oleographs from the Christmas numbers of American
magazines. But he does not sit in this room. He spends his leisure in
his bedroom. In America he has always lived in a boarding house where
his bedroom was the only privacy he knew, and he has gotten the habit
of living in one. It seems unnatural to him to sit in a sitting-room;
he does not like to take his coat off, and he only feels at home
in shirt sleeves. He keeps his books and his private papers in his
bedroom; he has a desk and a rocking chair there.

He has lived in China for five years, but he knows no Chinese and takes
no interest in the race among whom in all likelihood the best years of
his life will be spent. His business is done through an interpreter
and his house is managed by a boy. Now and then he takes a journey
of several hundred miles into Mongolia, a wild and rugged country,
either in Chinese carts or on ponies; and he sleeps at the wayside inns
where congregate merchants, drovers, herdsmen, men at arms, ruffians,
and wild fellows. The people of the land are turbulent; when there
is unrest he is exposed to not a little risk. But these are purely
business undertakings. They bore him. He is always glad to get back to
his familiar bedroom at the B.A.T. For he is a great reader. He reads
nothing but American magazines and the number of those he has sent to
him by every mail is amazing. He never throws them away and there are
piles of them all over the house. The city in which he lives is the
gateway into China from Mongolia. There dwell the teeming Chinese, and
through its gates pass constantly the Mongols with their caravans of
camels; endless processions of carts, drawn by oxen, which have brought
hides from the illimitable distances of Asia rumble noisily through
its crowded streets. He is bored. It has never occurred to him that he
lives a life in which the possibility of adventure is at his doors. He
can only recognise it through the printed page; and it needs a story of
derring-do in Texas or Nevada, of hairbreadth escape in the South Seas,
to stir his blood.




XXXV

THE STRANGER


It was a comfort in that sweltering heat to get out of the city. The
missionary stepped out of the launch in which he had dropped leisurely
down the river and comfortably settled himself in the chair which
was waiting for him at the water's edge. He was carried through the
village by the river side and began to ascend the hill. It was an
hour's journey along a pathway of broad stone steps, under fir trees,
and now and again you caught a delightful glimpse of the broad river
shining in the sun amid the exultant green of the padi fields. The
bearers went along with a swinging stride. The sweat on their backs
shone. It was a sacred mountain with a Buddhist monastery on the top
of it, and on the way up there were rest houses where the coolies set
down the chair for a few minutes and a monk in his grey robe gave you a
cup of flowered tea. The air was fresh and sweet. The pleasure of that
lazy journey--the swing of the chair was very soothing--made a day in
the city almost worth while; and at the end of it was his trim little
bungalow where he spent the summer, and before him the sweet-scented
night. The mail had come in that day and he was bringing on letters
and papers. There were four numbers of the _Saturday Evening Post_ and
four of the _Literary Digest_. He had nothing but pleasant things to
look forward to and the usual peace (a peace, as he often said, which
passeth all understanding), which filled him whenever he was among
these green trees, away from the teeming city, should long since have
descended upon him.

But he was harassed. He had had that day an unfortunate encounter and
he was unable, trivial as it was, to put it out of his mind. It was on
this account that his face bore a somewhat peevish expression. It was
a thin and sensitive face, almost ascetic, with regular features and
intelligent eyes. He was very long and thin, with the spindly legs of
a grasshopper, and as he sat in his chair swaying a little with the
motion of his bearers he reminded you, somewhat grotesquely, of a faded
lily. A gentle creature. He could never have hurt a fly.

He had run across Dr. Saunders in one of the streets of the city. Dr.
Saunders was a little grey-haired man, with a high colour and a snub
nose which gave him a strangely impudent expression. He had a large
sensual mouth and when he laughed, which he did very often, he showed
decayed and discoloured teeth; when he laughed his little blue eyes
wrinkled in a curious fashion and then he looked the very picture of
malice. There was something faunlike in him. His movements were quick
and unexpected. He walked with a rapid trip as though he were always
in a hurry. He was a doctor who lived in the heart of the city among
the Chinese. He was not on the register, but someone had made it his
business to find out that he had been duly qualified; he had been
struck off, but for what crime, whether social or purely professional,
none know; nor how he had happened to come to the East and eventually
settle on the China coast. But it was evident that he was a very
clever doctor and the Chinese had great faith in him. He avoided the
foreigners and rather disagreeable stories were circulated about him.
Everyone knew him to say how do you do to, but no one asked him to his
house nor visited him in his own.

When they had met that afternoon Dr. Saunders had exclaimed:

"What on earth has brought you to the city at this time of year?"

"I have some business that I couldn't leave any longer," answered the
missionary, "and then I wanted to get the mail."

"There was a stranger here the other day asking for you," said the
doctor.

"For me?" cried the other with surprise.

"Well, not for you particularly," explained the doctor. "He wanted
to know the way to the American Mission. I told him; but I said he
wouldn't find anyone there. He seemed rather surprised at that, so I
told him that you all went up to the hills in May and didn't come back
till September."

"A foreigner?" asked the missionary, still wondering who the stranger
could be.

"Oh, yes, certainly." The doctor's eyes twinkled. "Then he asked
me about the other missions; I told him the London Mission had a
settlement here, but it wasn't the least use going there as all the
missionaries were away in the hills. After all it's devilish hot in the
city. 'Then I'd like to go to one of the mission schools,' said the
stranger. 'Oh, they're all closed,' I said. 'Well, then I'll go to the
hospital.' 'That's well worth a visit,' I said, 'the American hospital
is equipped with all the latest contrivances. Their operating theatre
is perfect.' 'What is the name of the doctor in charge?' 'Oh, he's up
in the hills.' 'But what about the sick?' 'There are no sick between
May and September,' I said, 'and if there are they have to put up with
the native dispensers.'"

Dr. Saunders paused for a moment. The missionary looked ever so
slightly vexed.

"Well?" he said.

"The stranger looked at me irresolutely for a moment or two. 'I wanted
to see something of the missions before I left,' he said. 'You might
try the Roman Catholics,' I said, 'they're here all the year round.'
'When do they take their holidays then?' he asked. 'They don't,' I
said. He left me at that. I think he went to the Spanish convent."

The missionary fell into the trap and it irritated him to think how
ingenuously he had done so. He ought to have seen what was coming.

"Who was this anyway?" he asked innocently.

"I asked him his name," said the doctor. "'Oh, I'm Christ,' he said."

The missionary shrugged his shoulders and abruptly told his rickshaw
boy to go on.

It had put him thoroughly out of temper. It was so unjust. Of course
they went away from May to September. The heat made any useful activity
quite out of the question and it had been found by experience that
the missionaries preserved their health and strength much better if
they spent the hot months in the hills. A sick missionary was only an
encumbrance. It was a matter of practical politics and it had been
found that the Lord's work was done more efficiently if a certain
part of the year was set aside for rest and recreation. And then
the reference to the Roman Catholics was grossly unfair. They were
unmarried. They had no families to think of. The mortality among them
was terrifying. Why, in that very city, of fourteen nuns who had come
out to China ten years ago all but three were dead. It was perfectly
easy for them, because it was more convenient for their work, to live
in the middle of the city and to stay there all the year round. They
had no ties. They had no duties to those who were near and dear to
them. Oh, it was grossly unjust to drag in the Roman Catholics.

But suddenly an idea flashed through his mind. What rankled most was
that he had left the rascally doctor (you only had to look at his face
all puckered with malicious amusement to know he was a rogue) without
a word. There certainly was an answer, but he had not had the presence
of mind to make it; and now the perfect repartee occurred to him. A
glow of satisfaction filled him and he almost fancied that he had made
it. It was a crushing rejoinder and he rubbed his very long thin hands
with satisfaction. 'My dear Sir,' he ought to have said, 'Our Lord
never in the whole course of his ministry claimed to be the Christ.' It
was an unanswerable snub, and thinking of it the missionary forgot his
ill-humour.




XXXVI

DEMOCRACY


It was a cold night. I had finished my dinner, and my boy was making
up my bed while I sat over a brazier of burning charcoal. Most of the
coolies had already settled themselves for the night in a room next to
mine and through the thin matchboarding of the wall that separated us
I heard a couple of them talk. Another party of travellers had arrived
about an hour before and the small inn was full. Suddenly there was
a commotion and going to the door of my room to look out I saw three
sedan chairs enter the courtyard. They were set down in front of me and
from the first stepped out a stout Chinese of imposing aspect. He wore
a long black robe of figured silk, lined with squirrel, and on his head
a square fur cap. He seemed taken aback when he saw me at the door of
the principal guest chamber and turning to the landlord addressed him
in authoritative tones. It appeared that he was an official and he was
much annoyed to find that the best apartment in the inn was already
taken. He was told that but one room was available. It was small, with
pallets covered with tumbled straw lining the walls, and was used
as a rule only by coolies. He flung into a violent passion and on a
sudden arose a scene of the greatest animation. The official, his two
companions, and his bearers exclaimed against the indignity which it
was sought to thrust upon him, while the landlord and the servants of
the inn argued, expostulated, and entreated. The official stormed and
threatened. For a few minutes the courtyard, so silent before, rang
with the angry shouts; then, subsiding as quickly as it began, the
hubbub ceased and the official went into the vacant room. Hot water was
brought by a bedraggled servant, and presently the landlord followed
with great bowls of steaming rice. All was once more quiet.

An hour later I went into the yard to stretch my legs for five minutes
before going to bed and somewhat to my surprise, I came upon the
stout official, a little while ago so pompous and self-important,
seated at a table in the front of the inn with the most ragged of my
coolies. They were chatting amicably and the official quietly smoked a
water-pipe. He had made all that to-do to give himself face, but having
achieved his object was satisfied, and feeling the need of conversation
had accepted the company of any coolie without a thought of social
distinction. His manner was perfectly cordial and there was in it no
trace of condescension. The coolie talked with him on an equal footing.
It seemed to me that this was true democracy. In the East man is man's
equal in a sense you find neither in Europe nor in America. Position
and wealth put a man in a relation of superiority to another that is
purely adventitious, and they are no bar to sociability.

When I lay in my bed I asked myself why in the despotic East there
should be between men an equality so much greater than in the free and
democratic West, and was forced to the conclusion that the explanation
must be sought in the cess-pool. For in the West we are divided from
our fellows by our sense of smell. The working man is our master,
inclined to rule us with an iron hand, but it cannot be denied that he
stinks: none can wonder at it, for a bath in the dawn when you have to
hurry to your work before the factory bell rings is no pleasant thing,
nor does heavy labour tend to sweetness; and you do not change your
linen more than you can help when the week's washing must be done by a
sharp-tongued wife. I do not blame the working man because he stinks,
but stink he does. It makes social intercourse difficult to persons
of a sensitive nostril. The matutinal tub divides the classes more
effectually than birth, wealth, or education. It is very significant
that those novelists who have risen from the ranks of labour are apt to
make it a symbol of class prejudice, and one of the most distinguished
writers of our day always marks the rascals of his entertaining
stories by the fact that they take a bath every morning. Now, the
Chinese live all their lives in the proximity of very nasty smells.
They do not notice them. Their nostrils are blunted to the odours that
assail the Europeans and so they can move on an equal footing with the
tiller of the soil, the coolie, and the artisan. I venture to think
that the cess-pool is more necessary to democracy than parliamentary
institutions. The invention of the "sanitary convenience" has destroyed
the sense of equality in men. It is responsible for class hatred much
more than the monopoly of capital in the hands of the few.

It is a tragic thought that the first man who pulled the plug of a
water-closet with that negligent gesture rang the knell of democracy.




XXXVII

THE SEVENTH DAY ADVENTIST


He was a big man, and his bones were well covered. He gave you the
impression that he had put on flesh since he bought his clothes, for
they seemed somewhat tight for him. He always wore the same things, a
blue suit, evidently bought ready-made in a department store (the lapel
decorated with a small American flag) a high starched collar and a
white tie on which was a pattern of forget-me-nots. His short nose and
pugnacious chin gave his clean-shaven face a determined look; his eyes,
behind large, gold-rimmed spectacles, were large and blue; and his hair
receding on the temples, lank and dull, was plastered down on his head.
But on the crown protruded a rebellious cock's feather.

He was travelling up the Yangtze for the first time, but he took no
interest in his surroundings. He had no eye for the waste of turbulent
waters that was spread before him, nor for the colours, tragic or
tender, which sunrise and sunset lent the scene. The great junks with
their square white sails proceeded stately down the stream. The moon
rose, flooding the noble river with silver and giving a strange magic
to the temples on the bank, among a grove of trees. He was frankly
bored. During a certain part of the day he studied Chinese, but for the
rest of the time he read nothing but a _New York Times_ three months
old and the Parliamentary debates of July, 1915, which, heaven knows
why, happened to be on board. He took no interest in the religions
which flourished in the land he had come to evangelise. He classed them
all contemptuously as devil worship. I do not think he had ever read
the Analects of Confucius. He was ignorant of the history, art, and
literature of China.

I could not make out what had brought him to the country. He spoke of
his work as a profession which he had entered as a man might enter the
civil service, and which, though it was poorly paid (he complained
that he earned less than an artisan) he wanted notwithstanding to make
a good job of. He wanted to increase his church membership, he wanted
to make his school self-supporting. If ever he had had a serious call
to convert the heathen there was in him no trace of it now. He looked
upon the whole matter as a business proposition. The secret of success
lay in the precious word organization. He was upright, honest, and
virtuous, but there was neither passion in him nor enthusiasm. He
seemed to be under the impression that the Chinese were very simple
people, and because they did not know the same things that he did he
thought them ignorant. He could not help showing that he looked upon
himself as superior to them. The laws they made were not applicable
to the white man and he resented the fact that they expected him to
conform to their customs. But he was not a bad fellow; indeed he was a
good-humoured one and so long as you did not attempt to question his
authority there is no doubt that he would have done everything in his
power to serve you.




XXXVIII

THE PHILOSOPHER


It was surprising to find so vast a city in a spot that seemed to me
so remote. From its battlemented gate towards sunset you could see
the snowy mountains of Tibet. It was so populous that you could walk
at ease only on the walls and it took a rapid walker three hours to
complete their circuit. There was no railway within a thousand miles
and the river on which it stood was so shallow that only junks of light
burden could safely navigate it. Five days in a sampan were needed
to reach the Upper Yangtze. For an uneasy moment you asked yourself
whether trains and steamships were as necessary to the conduct of life
as we who use them every day consider; for here, a million persons
throve, married, begat their kind, and died; here a million persons
were busily occupied with commerce, art, and thought.

And here lived a philosopher of repute the desire to see whom had
been to me one of the incentives of a somewhat arduous journey. He
was the greatest authority in China on the Confucian learning. He was
said to speak English and German with facility. He had been for many
years secretary to one of the Empress Dowager's greatest viceroys,
but he lived now in retirement. On certain days in the week, however,
all through the year he opened his doors to such as sought after
knowledge, and discoursed on the teaching of Confucius. He had a body
of disciples, but it was small, since the students for the most part
preferred to his modest dwelling and his severe exhortations the
sumptuous buildings of the foreign university and the useful science
of the barbarians: with him this was mentioned only to be scornfully
dismissed. From all I heard of him I concluded that he was a man of
character.

When I announced my wish to meet this distinguished person my host
immediately offered to arrange a meeting; but the days passed and
nothing happened. I made enquiries and my host shrugged his shoulders.

"I sent him a chit and told him to come along," he said. "I don't know
why he hasn't turned up. He's a cross-grained old fellow."

I did not think it was proper to approach a philosopher in so cavalier
a fashion and I was hardly surprised that he had ignored a summons such
as this. I caused a letter to be sent asking in the politest terms I
could devise whether he would allow me to call upon him and within
two hours received an answer making an appointment for the following
morning at ten o'clock.

I was carried in a chair. The way seemed interminable. I went through
crowded streets and through streets deserted till I came at last
to one, silent and empty, in which at a small door in a long white
wall my bearers set down my chair. One of them knocked, and after a
considerable time a judas was opened; dark eyes looked through; there
was a brief colloquy; and finally I was admitted. A youth, pallid of
face, wizened, and poorly dressed, motioned me to follow him. I did not
know if he was a servant or a pupil of the great man. I passed through
a shabby yard and was led into a long low room sparsely furnished with
an American roll-top desk, a couple of blackwood chairs and two little
Chinese tables. Against the walls were shelves on which were a great
number of books: most of them, of course, were Chinese, but there
were many, philosophical and scientific works, in English, French and
German; and there were hundreds of unbound copies of learned reviews.
Where books did not take up the wall space hung scrolls on which in
various calligraphies were written, I suppose, Confucian quotations.
There was no carpet on the floor. It was a cold, bare, and comfortless
chamber. Its sombreness was relieved only by a yellow chrysanthemum
which stood by itself on the desk in a long vase.

I waited for some time and the youth who had shown me in brought a pot
of tea, two cups, and a tin of Virginian cigarettes. As he went out the
philosopher entered. I hastened to express my sense of the honour he
did me in allowing me to visit him. He waved me to a chair and poured
out the tea.

"I am flattered that you wished to see me," he returned. "Your
countrymen deal only with coolies and with compradores; they think
every Chinese must be one or the other."

I ventured to protest. But I had not caught his point. He leaned back
in his chair and looked at me with an expression of mockery.

"They think they have but to beckon and we must come."

I saw then that my friend's unfortunate communication still rankled. I
did not quite know how to reply. I murmured something complimentary.

He was an old man, tall, with a thin grey queue, and bright large eyes
under which were heavy bags. His teeth were broken and discoloured.
He was exceedingly thin, and his hands, fine and small, were withered
and claw-like. I had been told that he was an opium-smoker. He was
very shabbily dressed in a black gown, a little black cap, both much
the worse for wear, and dark grey trousers gartered at the ankle.
He was watching. He did not quite know what attitude to take up,
and he had the manner of a man who was on his guard. Of course the
philosopher occupies a royal place among those who concern themselves
with the things of the spirit and we have the authority of Benjamin
Disraeli that royalty must be treated with abundant flattery. I seized
my trowel. Presently I was conscious of a certain relaxation in his
demeanour. He was like a man who was all set and rigid to have his
photograph taken, but hearing the shutter click lets himself go and
eases into his natural self. He showed me his books.

"I took the Ph.D. in Berlin, you know," he said. "And afterwards I
studied for some time in Oxford. But the English, if you will allow me
to say so, have no great aptitude for philosophy."

Though he put the remark apologetically it was evident that he was not
displeased to say a slightly disagreeable thing.

"We have had philosophers who have not been without influence in the
world of thought," I suggested.

"Hume and Berkeley? The philosophers who taught at Oxford when I was
there were anxious not to offend their theological colleagues. They
would not follow their thought to its logical consequences in case they
should jeopardise their position in university society."

"Have you studied the modern developments of philosophy in America?" I
asked.

"Are you speaking of Pragmatism? It is the last refuge of those who
want to believe the incredible. I have more use for American petroleum
than for American philosophy."

His judgments were tart. We sat down once more and drank another cup
of tea. He began to talk with fluency. He spoke a somewhat formal
but an idiomatic English. Now and then he helped himself out with a
German phrase. So far as it was possible for a man of that stubborn
character to be influenced he had been influenced by Germany. The
method and the industry of the Germans had deeply impressed him and
their philosophical acumen was patent to him when a laborious professor
published in a learned magazine an essay on one of his own writings.

"I have written twenty books," he said. "And that is the only notice
that has ever been taken of me in a European publication."

But his study of Western philosophy had only served in the end to
satisfy him that wisdom after all was to be found within the limits of
the Confucian canon. He accepted its philosophy with conviction. It
answered the needs of his spirit with a completeness which made all
foreign learning seem vain. I was interested in this because it bore
out an opinion of mine that philosophy is an affair of character rather
than of logic: the philosopher believes not according to evidence,
but according to his own temperament; and his thinking merely serves
to make reasonable what his instinct regards as true. If Confucianism
gained so firm a hold on the Chinese it is because it explained and
expressed them as no other system of thought could do.

My host lit a cigarette. His voice at first had been thin and tired,
but as he grew interested in what he said it gained volume. He talked
vehemently. There was in him none of the repose of the sage. He was a
polemist and a fighter. He loathed the modern cry for individualism.
For him society was the unit, and the family the foundation of society.
He upheld the old China and the old school, monarchy, and the rigid
canon of Confucius. He grew violent and bitter as he spoke of the
students, fresh from foreign universities, who with sacrilegious hands
tore down the oldest civilisation in the world.

"But you, do you know what you are doing?" he exclaimed. "What is the
reason for which you deem yourselves our betters? Have you excelled
us in arts or letters? Have our thinkers been less profound than
yours? Has our civilisation been less elaborate, less complicated,
less refined than yours? Why, when you lived in caves and clothed
yourselves with skins we were a cultured people. Do you know that we
tried an experiment which is unique in the history of the world? We
sought to rule this great country not by force, but by wisdom. And
for centuries we succeeded. Then why does the white man despise the
yellow? Shall I tell you? Because he has invented the machine gun.
That is your superiority. We are a defenceless horde and you can blow
us into eternity. You have shattered the dream of our philosophers
that the world could be governed by the power of law and order. And
now you are teaching our young men your secret. You have thrust your
hideous inventions upon us. Do you not know that we have a genius for
mechanics? Do you not know that there are in this country four hundred
millions of the most practical and industrious people in the world? Do
you think it will take us long to learn? And what will become of your
superiority when the yellow man can make as good guns as the white and
fire them as straight? You have appealed to the machine gun and by the
machine gun shall you be judged."

But at that moment we were interrupted. A little girl came softly
in and nestled close up to the old gentleman. She stared at me with
curious eyes. He told me that she was his youngest child. He put his
arms round her and with a murmur of caressing words kissed her fondly.
She wore a black coat and trousers that barely reached her ankles, and
she had a long pig-tail hanging down her back. She was born on the day
the revolution was brought to a successful issue by the abdication of
the emperor.

"I thought she heralded the Spring of a new era," he said. "She was but
the last flower of this great nation's Fall."

From a drawer in his roll-top desk he took a few cash, and handing them
to her, sent her away.

"You see that I wear a queue," he said, taking it in his hands. "It is
a symbol. I am the last representative of the old China."

He talked to me, more gently now, of how philosophers in long past
days wandered from state to state with their disciples, teaching all
who were worthy to learn. Kings called them to their councils and made
them rulers of cities. His erudition was great and his eloquent phrases
gave a multicoloured vitality to the incidents he related to me of
the history of his country. I could not help thinking him a somewhat
pathetic figure. He felt in himself the capacity to administer the
state, but there was no king to entrust him with office; he had vast
stores of learning which he was eager to impart to the great band of
students that his soul hankered after, and there came to listen but a
few, wretched, half-starved, and obtuse provincials.

Once or twice discretion had made me suggest that I should take my
leave, but he had been unwilling to let me go. Now at last I was
obliged to. I rose. He held my hand.

"I should like to give you something as a recollection of your visit to
the last philosopher in China, but I am a poor man and I do not know
what I can give you that would be worthy of your acceptance."

I protested that the recollection of my visit was in itself a priceless
gift. He smiled.

"Men have short memories in these degenerate days, and I should like to
give you something more substantial. I would give you one of my books,
but you cannot read Chinese."

He looked at me with an amicable perplexity. I had an inspiration.

"Give me a sample of your calligraphy," I said.

"Would you like that?" He smiled. "In my youth I was considered to
wield the brush in a manner that was not entirely despicable."

He sat down at his desk, took a fair sheet of paper, and placed it
before him. He poured a few drops of water on a stone, rubbed the ink
stick in it, and took his brush. With a free movement of the arm he
began to write. And as I watched him I remembered with not a little
amusement something else which had been told me of him. It appeared
that the old gentleman, whenever he could scrape a little money
together, spent it wantonly in the streets inhabited by ladies to
describe whom a euphemism is generally used. His eldest son, a person
of standing in the city, was vexed and humiliated by the scandal of
this behaviour; and only his strong sense of filial duty prevented him
from reproaching the libertine with severity. I daresay that to a son
such looseness would be disconcerting, but the student of human nature
could look upon it with equanimity. Philosophers are apt to elaborate
their theories in the study, forming conclusions upon life which they
know only at second hand, and it has seemed to me often that their
works would have a more definite significance if they had exposed
themselves to the vicissitudes which befall the common run of men. I
was prepared to regard the old gentleman's dalliance in hidden places
with leniency. Perhaps he sought but to elucidate the most inscrutable
of human illusions.

He finished. To dry the ink he scattered a little ash on the paper and
rising handed it to me.

"What have you written?" I asked.

I thought there was a slightly malicious gleam in his eyes.

"I have ventured to offer you two little poems of my own."

"I did not know you were a poet."

"When China was still an uncivilised country," he retorted with
sarcasm, "all educated men could write verse at least with elegance."

I took the paper and looked at the Chinese characters. They made an
agreeable pattern upon it.

"Won't you also give me a translation?"

"_Traduttore--traditore_," he answered. "You cannot expect me to betray
myself. Ask one of your English friends. Those who know most about
China know nothing, but you will at least find one who is competent to
give you a rendering of a few rough and simple lines."

I bade him farewell, and with great politeness he showed me to my
chair. When I had the opportunity I gave the poems to a sinologue of
my acquaintance, and here is the version he made.[1] I confess that,
doubtless unreasonably, I was somewhat taken aback when I read it.

    _You loved me not: your voice was sweet;
    Your eyes were full of laughter; your hands were tender.
    And then you loved me: your voice was bitter;
    Your eyes were full of tears; your hands were cruel.
    Sad, sad that love should make you
    Unlovable._

       *       *       *       *       *

    _I craved the years would quickly pass
      That you might lose
    The brightness of your eyes, the peach-bloom of your skin,
    And all the cruel splendour of your youth.
      Then I alone would love you
      And you at last would care._

    _The envious years have passed full soon
      And you have lost
    The brightness of your eyes, the peach-bloom of your skin,
    And all the charming splendour of your youth.
        Alas, I do not love you
      And I care not if you care._

[1] I owe it to the kindness of my friend Mr. P.W. Davidson.




XXXIX

THE MISSIONARY LADY


She was certainly fifty, but a life of convictions harassed by never
a doubt had left her face unwrinkled. The hesitations of thought had
never lined the smoothness of her brow. Her features were bold and
regular, somewhat masculine, and her determined chin bore out the
impression given you by her eyes. They were blue, confident, and
unperturbed. They summed you up through large round spectacles. You
felt that here was a woman to whom command came easily. Her charity
was above all things competent and you were certain that she ran the
obvious goodness of her heart on thoroughly business lines. It was
possible to suppose that she was not devoid of human vanity (and this
is to be counted to her for grace) since she wore a dress of violet
silk, heavily embroidered, and a toque of immense pansies which on a
less respectable head would have been almost saucy. But my Uncle Henry,
for twenty-seven years Vicar of Whitstable, who had decided views on
the proper manner of dress for a clergyman's wife, never objected
to my Aunt Sophie wearing violet, and he would have found nothing
to criticise in the missionary lady's gown. She spoke fluently with
the even flow of water turned on at a tap. Her conversation had the
admirable volubility of a politician at the end of an electioneering
campaign. You felt that she knew what she meant (with most of us so
rare an accomplishment) and meant what she said.

"I always think," she remarked pleasantly, "that if you know both sides
of a question you'll judge differently from what you will if you only
know one side. But the fact remains that two and two make four and you
can argue all night and you won't make them five. Am I right or am I
wrong?"

I hastened to assure her that she was right, though with these new
theories of relativity and parallel lines behaving at infinity in such
a surprising manner I was in my heart of hearts none too sure.

"No one can eat their cake and have it," she continued, exemplifying
Benedetto Croce's theory that grammar has little to do with expression,
"and one has to take the rough with the smooth, but as I always say to
the children you can't expect to have everything your own way. No one
is perfect in this world and I always think that if you expect the best
from people you'll get the best."

I confess that I was staggered, but I determined to do my part. It was
only civil.

"Most men live long enough to discover that every cloud has a silver
lining," I began earnestly. "With perseverance you can do most things
that are not beyond your powers, and after all, it's better to want
what you have than to have what you want."

I thought her eyes were glazed with a sudden perplexity when I made
this confident statement, but I daresay it was only my fancy, for she
nodded vigorously.

"Of course, I see your point," she said. "We can't do more than we can."

But my blood was up now and I waved aside the interruption. I went on.

"Few people realise the profound truth that there are twenty shillings
in every pound and twelve pence in every shilling. I'm sure it's better
to see clearly to the end of your nose than indistinctly through a
brick wall. If there's one thing we can be certain about it is that the
whole is greater than the part."

When, with a hearty shake of the hand, firm and characteristic, she
bade me farewell, she said:

"Well, we've had a most interesting chat. It does one good in a place
like this, so far away from civilisation, to exchange ideas with one's
intellectual equals."

"Especially other people's," I murmured.

"I always think that one should profit by the great thoughts of the
past," she retorted. "It shows that the mighty dead have not lived in
vain."

Her conversation was devastating.




XL

A GAME OF BILLIARDS


I was sitting in the lobby of the hotel, reading a number, several days
old, of the _South China Times_, when the door of the bar was somewhat
brusquely thrown open and a very long, thin man appeared.

"Do you care for a game of billiards?" he said.

"By all means."

I got up and went with him into the bar. It was a small hotel, of
stone, somewhat pretentious in appearance, and it was kept by a
half-caste Portuguese who smoked opium. There were not half a dozen
people staying there, a Portuguese official and his wife waiting for a
ship to take them to a distant colony, a Lancashire engineer who was
sullenly drunk all day long, a mysterious lady, no longer young but
of voluptuous appearance, who came to the dining room for meals and
went back to her room immediately afterwards, and I had not seen the
stranger before. I supposed he had come in that evening on a Chinese
boat. He was a man of over fifty, I should think, shrivelled as though
the sap had been dried out of him by tropical suns, with a face that
was almost brick red. I could not place him. He might have been a
skipper out of a job or the agent of some foreign firm in Hong Kong. He
was very silent and he made no answer to the casual remarks that I made
in the course of the game. He played billiards well enough, though not
excellently, but he was a very pleasant fellow to play with; and when
he pocketed my ball, instead of leaving me a double balk, gave me a
reasonable shot. But when the game was over I should never have thought
of him again, if suddenly, breaking his silence for the first time, he
had not put me a very odd question.

"Do you believe in fate?" he asked.

"At billiards?" I retorted not a little astonished at his remark.

"No, in life."

I did not want to answer him seriously.

"I hardly know," I said.

He took his shot. He made a little break. At the end of it, chalking
his cue, he said:

"I do. I believe if things are coming to you, you can't escape them."

That was all. He said nothing more. When we had finished the game he
went up to bed, and I never saw him again. I shall never know what
strange emotion impelled him to put that sudden question to a stranger.




XLI

THE SKIPPER


I knew he was drunk.

He was a skipper of the new school, a neat little man, clean-shaven,
who might easily have passed for the commander of a submarine. In
his cabin there hung a beautiful new coat with gold braid on it, the
uniform which for its good service in the war has been granted to the
mercantile marine, but he was shy of using it; it seemed absurd when he
was no more than captain of a small boat on the Yangtze; and he stood
on his bridge in a neat brown suit and a homburg hat; you could almost
see yourself in his admirably polished shoes. His eyes were clear and
bright and his skin was fresh. Though he had been at sea for twenty
years and could not have been much less than forty he did not look more
than twenty-eight. You might be sure that he was a clean-living fellow,
as healthy in mind as he was in body, and the depravity of the East
of which they talk had left him untouched. He had a pleasant taste in
light literature and the works of E.V. Lucas adorned his book-case. In
his cabin you saw a photograph of a football team in which he figured
and two of a young woman with neatly waved hair whom it was possible
enough he was engaged to.

I knew he was drunk, but I did not think he was very drunk, till he
asked me suddenly:

"What is democracy?"

I returned an evasive, perhaps a flippant answer, and for some minutes
the conversation turned on less unseasonable topics to the occasion.
Then breaking his silence, he said:

"I hope you don't think I'm a socialist because I said, what is
democracy."

"Not at all," I answered, "but I don't see why you shouldn't be a
socialist."

"I give you my word of honour I'm not," he protested. "If I had my way
I'd stand them up against a wall and shoot them."

"What is socialism?" I asked.

"Oh, you know what I mean, Henderson and Ramsay Macdonald and all that
sort of thing," he answered. "I'm about fed up with the working man."

"But you're a working man yourself, I should have thought."

He was silent for quite a long time and I thought his mind had wandered
to other things. But I was wrong; he was thinking my statement over in
all its bearings, for at last he said:

"Look here, I'm not a working man. Hang it all, I was at Harrow."




XLII

THE SIGHTS OF THE TOWN


I am not an industrious sight-seer, and when guides, professional
or friendly, urge me to visit a famous monument I have a stubborn
inclination to send them about their business. Too many eyes before
mine have looked with awe upon Mont Blanc; too many hearts before mine
have throbbed with deep emotion in the presence of the Sistine Madonna.
Sights like these are like women of too generous sympathies: you feel
that so many persons have found solace in their commiseration that you
are embarrassed when they bid you, with what practised tact, to whisper
in their discreet ears the whole tale of your distress. Supposing you
were the last straw that broke the camel's back! No, Madam, I will take
my sorrows (if I cannot bear them alone, which is better) to someone
who is not quite so certain of saying so exactly the right thing to
comfort me. When I am in a foreign town I prefer to wander at random
and if maybe I lose the rapture of a Gothic cathedral I may happen upon
a little Romanesque chapel or a Renaissance doorway which I shall be
able to flatter myself no one else has troubled about.

But of course this was a very extraordinary sight indeed and it would
have been absurd to miss it. I came across it by pure chance. I was
sauntering along a dusty road outside the city wall and by the side of
it I saw a number of memorial arches. They were small and undecorated,
standing not across the way but along it, close to one another, and
sometimes one in front of the other, as though they had been erected
by no impulse of gratitude to the departed or of admiration for the
virtuous but in formal compliment, as knighthoods on the King's
birthday are conferred on prominent citizens of provincial towns.
Behind this row of arches the land rose sharply and since in this part
of the country the Chinese bury their dead by preference on the side
of a hill it was thickly covered with graves. A trodden path led to a
little tower and I followed it. It was a stumpy little tower, ten feet
high perhaps, made of rough-hewn blocks of stone; it was cone shaped
and the roof was like a Pierrot's hat. It stood on a hillock, quaint
and rather picturesque against the blue sky, amid the graves. At its
foot were a number of rough baskets thrown about in disorder. I walked
round and on one side saw an oblong hole, eighteen inches by eight,
perhaps, from which hung a stout string. From the hole there came a
very strange, a nauseating odour. Suddenly I understood what the queer
little building was. It was a baby tower. The baskets were the baskets
in which the babies had been brought, two or three of them were quite
new, they could not have been there more than a few hours. And the
string? Why, if the person who brought the baby, parent or grandmother,
midwife or obliging friend, were of a humane disposition and did not
care to let the new-born child drop to the bottom (for underneath the
tower was a deep pit), it could be let down gently by means of the
string. The odour was the odour of putrefaction. A lively little boy
came up to me while I stood there and made me understand that four
babes had been brought to the tower that morning.

There are philosophers who look upon evil with a certain complacency,
since without it, they opine, there would be no possibility of good.
Without want there would be no occasion for charity, without distress
of sympathy, without danger of courage, and without unhappiness of
resignation. They would find in the Chinese practice of infanticide
an apt illustration of their views. Except for the baby tower there
would not be in this city an orphanage: the traveller would miss an
interesting and curious sight, and a few poor women would have no
opportunity to exercise a beautiful and touching virtue. The orphanage
is shabby and bedraggled; it is situated in a poor and crowded part of
the city; for the Spanish nuns who conduct it--there are but five of
them--think it more convenient to live where they may be most useful;
and besides, they have not the money to build commodious premises in a
salubrious quarter. The institution is supported by the work, lace and
fine embroidery, which they teach the girls to do, and by the alms of
the faithful.

Two nuns, the Mother Superior and another, showed me what there was
to see. It was very strange to go through the whitewashed rooms,
work-rooms, playrooms, dormitories, and refectory, low, cool, and bare;
for you might have been in Spain, and when you passed a window you half
expected to catch a glimpse of the Giralda. And it was charming to see
the tenderness with which the nuns used the children. There were two
hundred of them and they were, of course, orphans only in the sense
that their parents had abandoned them. There was one room in which a
number were playing, all of the same age, perhaps four, and all of the
same size; with their black eyes and black hair, their yellow skins,
they all looked so much alike that they might have been the children of
a Chinese Old Woman who lived in a Shoe. They crowded round the nuns
and began to romp with them. The Mother Superior had the gentlest voice
I ever heard, but it became gentler still when she joked with the tiny
mites. They nestled about her. She looked a very picture of charity.
Some were deformed and some were diseased, some were puny and hideous,
some were blind; it gave me a little shudder: I marvelled when I saw
the love that filled her kind eyes and the affectionate sweetness of
her smile.

Then I was taken into a parlour where I was made to eat little sweet
Spanish cakes and given a glass of Manzanilla to drink, and when I told
them that I had lived in Seville a third nun was sent for, so that she
might talk for a few minutes with someone who had seen the city she was
born in. With pride they showed me their poor little chapel with its
tawdry statue of the Blessed Virgin, its paper flowers, and its gaudy,
shoddy decoration; for those dear faithful hearts, alas! were possessed
of singularly bad taste. I did not care: to me there was something
positively touching in that dreadful vulgarity. And when I was on the
point of leaving the Mother Superior asked me whether I would care to
see the babies who had come in that day. In order to persuade people to
bring them they gave twenty cents for every one. Twenty cents!

"You see," she explained, "they have often a long walk to come here and
unless we give them something they won't take the trouble."

She took me into a little anteroom, near the entrance, and there lying
on a table under a counterpane were four new-born babes. They had just
been washed and put into long clothes. The counterpane was lifted off.
They lay side by side, on their backs, four tiny wriggling mites, very
red in the face, rather cross perhaps because they had been bathed,
and very hungry. Their eyes seemed preternaturally large. They were so
small, so helpless: you were forced to smile when you looked at them
and at the same time you felt a lump in your throat.




XLIII

NIGHTFALL


Towards evening perhaps, tired of walking, you get into your chair
and on the crest of a hill you pass through a stone gateway. You
cannot tell why there should be a gateway in that deserted spot, far
from a village, but a fragment of massive wall suggests the ruin of
fortifications against the foes of a forgotten dynasty. And when you
come through the gateway you see below you the shining water in the
rice fields, diapered, like the chess-board in some Chinese _Alice in
Wonderland_, and then the rounded, tree-clad hills. But making your way
down the stone steps of the narrow causeway which is the high road from
city to city, in the gathering darkness you pass a coppice, and from it
waft towards you chill woodland odours of the night. Then you hear no
longer the measured tread of your bearers, your ears are on a sudden
deaf to their sharp cries as they change the pole from shoulder to
shoulder, and to the ceaseless chatter or the occasional snatch of song
with which they enliven the monotonous way, for the woodland odours
are the same as those which steal up from the fat Kentish soil when
you pass through the woods of Bleane; and nostalgia seizes you. Your
thoughts travel through time and space, far from the Here and Now, and
you remember your vanished youth with its high hopes, its passionate
love, and its ambition. Then if you are a cynic, as they say, and
therefore a sentimentalist, tears come to your unwilling eyes. And when
you have regained your self-control the night has fallen.




XLIV

THE NORMAL MAN


I was once obliged to study anatomy, a very dreary business, since
there is neither rhyme nor reason for the vast number of things you
have to remember; but one remark made by my teacher, when he was
helping me in the dissection of a thigh, has always remained in my
memory. I was looking in vain for a certain nerve and it needed his
greater skill to discover it in a place in which I had not sought it. I
was aggrieved because the text book had misled me. He smiled and said:

"You see, the normal is the rarest thing in the world."

And though he spoke of anatomy he might have spoken with equal truth
of man. The casual observation impressed itself upon me as many a
profounder one has not and all the years that have passed since then,
with the increasing knowledge of human nature which they have brought,
have only strengthened my conviction of its truth. I have met a hundred
men who seemed perfectly normal only to find in them presently an
idiosyncrasy so marked as to put them almost in a class by themselves.
It has entertained me not a little to discover the hidden oddity of
men to all appearances most ordinary. I have been often amazed to come
upon a hideous depravity in men who you would have sworn were perfectly
commonplace. I have at last sought the normal man as a precious work of
art. It has seemed to me that to know him would give me that peculiar
satisfaction which can only be described as sthetic.

I really thought I had found him in Robert Webb. He was a consul in one
of the smaller ports and I was given a letter to him. I heard a good
deal about him on my way through China and I heard nothing but good.
Whenever I happened to mention that I was going to the port in which he
was stationed someone was sure to say:

"You'll like Bob Webb. He's an awfully good chap."

He was no less popular as an official than he was as a private person.
He managed to please the merchants because he was active in their
interests, without antagonising the Chinese who praised his firmness or
the missionaries who approved his private life. During the revolution
by his tact, decision, and courage he had not only saved from great
danger the foreign population of the city in which he then was, but
also many Chinese. He had come forward as a peacemaker between the
warring parties and by his ingenuity had been able to bring about a
satisfactory settlement. He was marked down for promotion. I certainly
found him a very engaging fellow. Though he was not good-looking his
appearance was pleasing; he was tall, perhaps a little more than of
average height, well covered without being fat, with a fresh complexion
inclined now (for he was nearly fifty) to be somewhat bloated in the
morning. This was not strange, for in China the foreigners both eat and
drink a great deal too much, and Robert Webb had a healthy liking for
the good things of life. He kept an excellent table. He liked eating
in company and it was seldom that he did not have one or two people to
tiffin or to dinner with him. His eyes were blue and friendly. He had
the social gifts that give pleasure: he played the piano quite well,
but he liked the music that other people liked, and he was always
ready to play a one step or a waltz if others wanted to dance. With
a wife, a son, and a daughter in England he could not afford to keep
racing ponies, but he was keenly interested in racing; he was a good
tennis player, and his bridge was better than the average. Unlike many
of his colleagues he did not allow himself to be overwhelmed by his
position, and in the evening at the club he was affable and unaffected.
But he did not forget that he was His Britannic Majesty's Consul and
I admired the skill with which without portentousness he preserved
the dignity which he thought necessary to his station. In short he
had very good manners. He talked agreeably, and his interests, though
somewhat ordinary, were varied. He had a nice sense of humour. He could
make a joke and tell a good story. He was very happily married. His
son was at Charterhouse and he showed me a photograph of a tall, fair
lad in flannels, with a frank and pleasant face. He showed me also
the photograph of his daughter. It is one of the tragedies of life in
China that a man must be separated for long periods from his family,
and owing to the war Robert Webb had not seen his for eight years. His
wife had taken the children home when the boy was eight and the girl
eleven. They had meant to wait till his leave came so that they could
go all together, but he was stationed in a place that suited neither
of the children and he and his wife agreed that she had better take
them at once. His leave was due in three years and then he could spend
twelve months with them. But when the time for this came the war broke
out, the Consular staff was short-handed, and it was impossible for him
to leave his post. His wife did not want to be separated from young
children, the journey was difficult and dangerous, no one expected the
war to last so long, and one by one the years passed.

"My girl was a child when I saw her last," he said to me when he showed
me the photograph. "Now she's a married woman."

"When are you going on leave?" I asked him.

"Oh, my wife's coming out now."

"But don't you want to see your daughter?" I asked.

He looked at the photograph again and then looked away. There was a
curious look in his face, a somewhat peevish look, I thought, and he
answered:

"I've been away from home too long now. I shall never go back."

I leaned back in my chair, smoking my pipe. The photograph showed me a
girl of nineteen with wide blue eyes and bobbed hair; it was a pretty
face, open and friendly, but the most noticeable thing about it was a
peculiar charm of expression. Bob Webb's daughter was a very alluring
young person. I liked that engaging audacity.

"It was rather a surprise to me when she sent along that photograph,"
he said presently. "I'd always thought of her as a child. If I'd met
her in the street I shouldn't have known her."

He gave a little laugh that was not quite natural.

"It isn't fair.... When she was a child she used to love being petted."

His eyes were fixed on the photograph. I seemed to see in them a very
unexpected emotion.

"I can hardly realise she's my daughter. I thought she'd come back with
her mother, and then she wrote and said she was engaged."

He looked away now and I thought there was a singular embarrassment in
the down-turned corners of his mouth.

"I suppose one gets selfish out here, I felt awfully sore, but I gave a
big dinner party to all the fellows here the day she was married, and
we all got blind."

He gave an apologetic laugh.

"I had to, you know," he said awkwardly. "I had such an awful hump."

"What's the young man like?" I asked.

"She's awfully in love with him. When she writes to me her letters are
about nothing else." There was an odd quaver in his voice. "It's a bit
thick to bring a child into the world and to educate her and be fond of
her and all that sort of thing just for some man whom you've never even
seen. I've got his photograph somewhere, I don't know where it is. I
don't think I'd care about him very much."

He helped himself to another whisky. He was tired. He looked old and
bloated. He said nothing for a long time, and then suddenly he seemed
to pull himself together.

"Well, thank God, her mother's coming out soon."

I don't think he was quite a normal man after all.




XLV

THE OLD TIMER


He was seventy-six years old. He had come to China when he was little
more than a boy as second mate of a sailing vessel and had never gone
home again. Since then he had been many things. For long years he had
commanded a Chinese boat that ran from Shanghai to Ichang and he knew
by heart every inch of the great and terrible Yangtze. He had been
master of a tug at Hong-Kong and had fought in the Ever-Victorious
Army. He had got a lot of loot in the Boxer troubles and had been in
Hankow during the revolution when the rebels shelled the city. He had
been married three times, first to a Japanese woman, then to a Chinese,
and finally when he was hard upon fifty to an Englishwoman. They were
all dead now and it was the Japanese who lingered in his memory. He
would tell you how she arranged the flowers in the house in Shanghai,
just one chrysanthemum in a vase or a sprig of cherry blossom; and he
always remembered how she held a tea-cup, with both hands, delicately.
He had had a number of children, but he took no interest in them; they
were settled in the various ports of China, in banks and shipping
offices, and he seldom saw them. He was proud of his daughter by his
English wife, the only girl he ever had, but she had married well and
was gone to England. He would never see her again. The only person
now for whom he had any affection was the boy who had been with him
for five and forty years. He was a little wizened Chinaman, with a
bald head, slow of movement and solemn. He was well over sixty. They
quarrelled incessantly. The old timer would tell the boy that he was
past his work and that he must get rid of him, and then the boy would
say that he was tired of serving a mad foreign devil. But each knew
that the other did not mean a word he said. They were old friends, old
men both of them, and they would remain together till death parted them.

It was when he married his English wife that he retired from the water
and put his savings into a hotel. But it was not a success. It was a
little way from Shanghai, a summer resort, and it was before there were
motor cars in China. He was a sociable fellow and he spent too much of
his time in the bar. He was generous and he gave away as many drinks as
were paid for. He also had the peculiar habit of spitting in the bath
and the more squeamish of his visitors objected to it. When his last
wife died he found it was she who had kept things from going to pieces
and in a little while he could no longer bear up against the difficulty
of his circumstances. All his savings had gone into buying the place,
now heavily mortgaged, and in making up the deficit year by year. He
was obliged to sell out to a Japanese and having paid his debts at the
age of sixty-eight found himself without a penny. But, by God, sir, he
was a sailor. One of the companies running boats up the Yangtze, gave
him a berth as chief officer--he had no master's certificate--and he
returned to the river which he knew so well. For eight years he had
been on the same run.

And now he stood on the bridge of his trim little ship, not so large as
a penny steamer on the Thames, a gallant figure, upright and slender
as when he was a lad, in a neat blue suit and the company's cap set
jauntily on his white hair, with his pointed beard nattily trimmed.
Seventy-six years old. It is a great age. With his head thrown back,
his glasses in his hand, the Chinese pilot by his side, he watched the
vast expanse of the winding river. A fleet of junks with their high
sterns, their square sails set, descended on the swift current, and
the rowers chanted a monotonous chant as they worked at their creaking
oars. The yellow water in the setting sun was lovely with pale soft
tints, it was as smooth as glass; and along the flat banks the trees
and the huts of a bedraggled village, hazy in the heat of the day, were
now silhouetted sharply, like the shadows of a shadowgraph, against the
pale sky. He raised his head as he heard the cry of wild geese and he
saw them flying high above him in a great V to what far lands he knew
not. In the distance against the sunlight stood a solitary hill crowned
with temples. Because he had seen all this so often it affected him
strangely. The dying day made him think, he knew not why, of his long
past and of his great age. He regretted nothing.

"By George," he muttered, "I've had a fine life."




XLVI

THE PLAIN


The incident was of course perfectly trivial, and it could be very
easily explained; but I was surprised that the eyes of the spirit could
blind me so completely to what was visible to the eyes of sense. I was
taken aback to find how completely one could be at the mercy of the
laws of association. Day after day I had marched among the uplands and
to-day I knew that I must come to the great plain in which lay the
ancient city whither I was bound; but when I set out in the morning
there was no sign that I approached it. Indeed the hills seemed no less
sheer and when I reached the top of one, thinking to see the valley
below, it was only to see before me one steeper and taller yet. Beyond,
climbing steadily, I could see the white causeway that I had followed
so long, shining in the sunlight as it skirted the brow of a rugged
tawny rock. The sky was blue and in the west hung here and there little
clouds like fishing boats becalmed towards evening off Dungeness. I
trudged along, mounting all the time, alert for the prospect that
awaited me, if not round this bend, then round the next, and at last,
suddenly, when I was thinking of other things, I came upon it. But
it was no Chinese landscape that I saw, with its padi fields, its
memorial arches and its fantastic temples, with its farmhouses set in
a bamboo grove and its wayside inns where under the banyan trees the
poor coolies may rest them of their weary loads; it was the valley of
the Rhine, the broad plain all golden in the sunset, the valley of the
Rhine with its river, a silvery streak, running through it, and the
distant towers of Worms; it was the great plain upon which my young
eyes rested, when, a student in Heidelberg, after walking long among
the fir-clad hills above the old city, I came out upon a clearing. And
because I was there first conscious of beauty; because there I knew
the first glow of the acquisition of knowledge (each book I read was
an extraordinary adventure); because there I first knew the delight of
conversation (oh, those wonderful commonplaces which each boy discovers
as though none had discovered them before); because of the morning
stroll in the sunny Anlage, the cakes and coffee which refreshed my
abstemious youth at the end of a strenuous walk, the leisurely evenings
on the castle terrace, with the smoky blue haze over the tumbled roofs
of the old town below me; because of Goethe and Heine and Beethoven and
Wagner and (why not?) Strauss with his waltzes, and the beer-garden
where the band played and girls with yellow plaits walked sedately;
because of all these things--recollections which have all the force
of the appeal of sense--to me not only does the word _plain_ mean
everywhere and exclusively the valley of the Rhine; but the only symbol
for happiness I know is a wide prospect all golden in the setting sun,
with a shining stream of silver running through it, like the path of
life or like the ideal that guides you through it, and far away the
grey towers of an ancient town.




XLVII

FAILURE


A little man, portly, in a fantastic hat, like a bushranger's, with
an immense brim, a pea-jacket such as you see in Leech's pictures of
the sea-faring man, and very wide check trousers of a cut fashionable
heaven knows how many years ago. When he takes off his hat you see a
fine head of long curly hair, and though he is approaching the sixties
it is scarcely grey. His features are regular. He wears a collar
several sizes too large for him so that his whole neck, massive and
statuesque, is shown. He has the look of a Roman Emperor in a tragedy
of the sixties and this air of an actor of the old school is enhanced
by his deep booming voice. His stumpy frame makes it slightly absurd.
You can imagine his declaiming the blank verse of Sheridan Knowles with
an emphasis to rouse the pit to frenzy, and when he greets you, with
too large a gesture, you guess how that resonant organ would tremble
when he wrung your heart (in 1860) over the death of his child. It was
splendid a little later to hear him ask the Chinese servant for "me
boots, boy, me boots. A kingdom for me boots." He confessed that he
should have been an actor.

"To be or not to be, that was the question, but me family, me family,
dear boy, they would have died of the disgrace, and so I was exposed to
the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune."

In short he came out to China as a tea-taster. But he came when the
Ceylon tea was already ousting the Chinese and it was no longer
possible for the merchant to enrich himself in a few years. But the
old lavishness endured and life was led in a grand style when the
means to pay for it no longer existed. The struggle became harder.
Finally came the Sino-Japanese war, and with the loss of Formosa,
ruin. The tea-taster looked about for other means of livelihood. He
became a wine-merchant, an undertaker, an estate-agent, a broker,
an auctioneer. He tried every way of making money that his ardent
imagination suggested, but with the diminishing prosperity of the
port his efforts were bootless. Life was too much for him. And now at
last he had the pitiful air of a broken man; there was even something
touching in it, like the appeal of a woman who cannot believe in the
loss of her beauty and implores the compliment which reassures but no
longer convinces her. And yet, notwithstanding, he had a solace: he had
still a magnificent assurance; he was a failure and he knew it; but it
did not really affect him, for he was the victim of fate: no shadow of
a doubt in his own capacity had ever crossed his mind.




XLVIII

A STUDENT OF THE DRAMA


He sent in a neat card of the correct shape and size, deeply bordered
in black, upon which under his name was printed _Professor of
Comparative Modern Literature_. He turned out to be a young man, small,
with tiny elegant hands, with a larger nose than you see as a rule in
the Chinese and gold rimmed spectacles. Though it was a warm day he
was dressed, in European clothes, in a suit of heavy tweed. He seemed
a trifle shy. He spoke in a high falsetto, as though his voice had
never broken, and those shrill notes gave I know not what feeling of
unreality to his conversation. He had studied in Geneva and in Paris,
Berlin and Vienna, and he expressed himself fluently in English,
French, and German.

It appeared that he lectured on the drama and he had lately written,
in French, a work on the Chinese theatre. His studies abroad had left
him with a surprising enthusiasm for Scribe, and this was the model
he proposed for the regeneration of the Chinese drama. It was curious
to hear him demand that the drama should be exciting. He was asking
for the _pice bien faite_, the _scne  faire_, the curtain, the
unexpected, the dramatic. The Chinese theatre, with its elaborate
symbolism, has been what we are always crying for, the theatre of
ideas; and apparently it has been perishing of dullness. It is true
that ideas do not grow on every gooseberry bush, they need novelty to
make them appetising, and when they are stale they stink as badly as
stale fish.

But then, remembering the description on the card, I asked my friend
what books, English and French, he recommended his students to read in
order to familiarise themselves with the current literature of the day.
He hesitated a little.

"I really don't know," he said at last, "you see, that's not my branch,
I only have to do with drama; but if you're interested I'll ask my
colleague who lectures on European fiction to call on you."

"I beg your pardon," I said.

"Have you read _Les Avaris_?" he asked. "I think that is the finest
play that has been produced in Europe since Scribe."

"Do you?" I said politely.

"Yes, you see our students are greatly interested in sociological
questions."

It is my misfortune that I am not, and so as deftly as I could I led
the conversation to Chinese philosophy which I was desultorily reading.
I mentioned Chuang-Tzu. The professor's jaw fell.

"He lived a very long time ago," he said, perplexed.

"So did Aristotle," I murmured pleasantly.

"I have never studied the philosophers," he said, "but of course we
have at our university a professor of Chinese philosophy and if you are
interested in that I will ask him to come and call on you."

It is useless to argue with a pedagogue, as the Spirit of the Ocean
(somewhat portentously to my mind) remarked to the Spirit of the River
and I resigned myself to discuss the drama. My professor was interested
in its technique and indeed was preparing a course of lectures on the
subject, which he seemed to think both complicated and abstruse. He
flattered me by asking me what were the secrets of the craft.

"I know only two," I answered. "One is to have common-sense and the
other is to stick to the point."

"Does it require no more than that to write a play?" he inquired with a
shade of dismay in his tone.

"You want a certain knack," I allowed, "but no more than to play
billiards."

"They lecture on the technique of the drama in all the important
universities of America," said he.

"The Americans are an extremely practical people," I answered. "I
believe that Harvard is instituting a chair to instruct grandmothers
how to suck eggs."

"I do not think I quite understand you."

"If you can't write a play no one can teach you and if you can it's as
easy as falling off a log."

Here his face expressed a lively perplexity, but I think only because
he could not make up his mind whether this operation came within the
province of the professor of physics or within that of the professor of
applied mechanics.

"But if it is so easy to write a play why do dramatists take so long
about it?"

"They didn't, you know. Lope de la Vega and Shakespeare and a hundred
others wrote copiously and with ease. Some modern playwrights have
been perfectly illiterate men and have found it an almost insuperable
difficulty to put two sentences together. A celebrated English
dramatist once showed me a manuscript and I saw that he had written the
question: will you have sugar in your tea, five times before he could
put it in this form. A novelist would starve if he could not on the
whole say what he wanted to without any beating about the bush."

"You would not call Ibsen an illiterate man and yet it is well known
that he took two years to write a play."

"It is obvious that Ibsen found a prodigious difficulty in thinking of
a plot. He racked his brain furiously, month after month, and at last
in despair used the very same that he had used before."

"What do you mean?" the professor cried, his voice rising to a shrill
scream. "I do not understand you at all."

"Have you not noticed that Ibsen uses the same plot over and over
again? A number of people are living in a closed and stuffy room, then
some one comes (from the mountains or from over the sea) and flings the
window open; everyone gets a cold in the head and the curtain falls."

I thought it just possible that the shadow of a smile might lighten for
a moment the professor's grave face, but he knit his brows and gazed
for two minutes into space. Then he rose.

"I will peruse the works of Henrik Ibsen once more with that point of
view in mind," he said.

I did not omit before he left to put him the question which one earnest
student of the drama always puts another when peradventure they meet.
I asked him, namely, what he thought was the future of the theatre.
I had an idea that he said, oh hell, but on reflection I believe his
exclamation must have been, _ ciel!_ He sighed, he shook his head, he
threw up his elegant hands; he looked the picture of dejection. It was
certainly a comfort to find that all thoughtful people considered the
drama's state in China no less desperate than all thoughtful people
consider it in England.




XLIX

THE TAIPAN


No one knew better than he that he was an important person. He was
number one in not the least important branch of the most important
English firm in China. He had worked his way up through solid ability
and he looked back with a faint smile at the callow clerk who had
come out to China thirty years before. When he remembered the modest
home he had come from, a little red house in a long row of little red
houses, in Barnes, a suburb which, aiming desperately at the genteel,
achieves only a sordid melancholy, and compared it with the magnificent
stone mansion, with its wide verandahs and spacious rooms, which was
at once the office of the company and his own residence, he chuckled
with satisfaction. He had come a long way since then. He thought of the
high tea to which he sat down when he came home from school (he was at
St. Paul's), with his father and mother and his two sisters, a slice
of cold meat, a great deal of bread and butter and plenty of milk in
his tea, everybody helping himself, and then he thought of the state in
which now he ate his evening meal. He always dressed and whether he was
alone or not he expected the three boys to wait at table. His number
one boy knew exactly what he liked and he never had to bother himself
with the details of housekeeping; but he always had a set dinner with
soup and fish, entre, roast, sweet and savoury, so that if he wanted
to ask anyone in at the last moment he could. He liked his food and he
did not see why when he was alone he should have less good a dinner
than when he had a guest.

He had indeed gone far. That was why he did not care to go home now,
he had not been to England for ten years, and he took his leave in
Japan or Vancouver where he was sure of meeting old friends from the
China coast. He knew no one at home. His sisters had married in their
own station, their husbands were clerks and their sons were clerks;
there was nothing between him and them; they bored him. He satisfied
the claims of relationship by sending them every Christmas a piece of
fine silk, some elaborate embroidery, or a case of tea. He was not a
mean man and as long as his mother lived he had made her an allowance.
But when the time came for him to retire he had no intention of going
back to England, he had seen too many men do that and he knew how often
it was a failure; he meant to take a house near the race-course in
Shanghai: what with bridge and his ponies and golf he expected to get
through the rest of his life very comfortably. But he had a good many
years before he need think of retiring. In another five or six Higgins
would be going home and then he would take charge of the head office
in Shanghai. Meanwhile he was very happy where he was, he could save
money, which you couldn't do in Shanghai, and have a good time into the
bargain. This place had another advantage over Shanghai: he was the
most prominent man in the community and what he said went. Even the
consul took care to keep on the right side of him. Once a consul and he
had been at loggerheads and it was not he who had gone to the wall. The
taipan thrust out his jaw pugnaciously as he thought of the incident.

But he smiled, for he felt in an excellent humour. He was walking back
to his office from a capital luncheon at the Hong-Kong and Shanghai
Bank. They did you very well there. The food was first rate and there
was plenty of liquor. He had started with a couple of cocktails, then
he had some excellent sauterne and he had finished up with two glasses
of port and some fine old brandy. He felt good. And when he left he did
a thing that was rare with him; he walked. His bearers with his chair
kept a few paces behind him in case he felt inclined to slip into it,
but he enjoyed stretching his legs. He did not get enough exercise
these days. Now that he was too heavy to ride it was difficult to get
exercise. But if he was too heavy to ride he could still keep ponies,
and as he strolled along in the balmy air he thought of the spring
meeting. He had a couple of griffins that he had hopes of and one of
the lads in his office had turned out a fine jockey (he must see they
didn't sneak him away, old Higgins in Shanghai would give a pot of
money to get him over there) and he ought to pull off two or three
races. He flattered himself that he had the finest stable in the city.
He pouted his broad chest like a pigeon. It was a beautiful day, and it
was good to be alive.

He paused as he came to the cemetery. It stood there, neat and orderly,
as an evident sign of the community's opulence. He never passed the
cemetery without a little glow of pride. He was pleased to be an
Englishman. For the cemetery stood in a place, valueless when it was
chosen, which with the increase of the city's affluence was now worth
a great deal of money. It had been suggested that the graves should
be moved to another spot and the land sold for building, but the
feeling of the community was against it. It gave the taipan a sense of
satisfaction to think that their dead rested on the most valuable site
on the island. It showed that there were things they cared for more
than money. Money be blowed! When it came to "the things that mattered"
(this was a favourite phrase with the taipan) well, one remembered that
money wasn't everything.

And now he thought he would take a stroll through. He looked at the
graves. They were neatly kept and the pathways were free from weeds.
There was a look of prosperity. And as he sauntered along he read the
names on the tombstones. Here were three side by side; the captain,
the first mate, and the second mate of the barque _Mary Baxter_, who
had all perished together in the typhoon of 1908. He remembered it
well. There was a little group of two missionaries, their wives and
children, who had been massacred during the Boxer troubles. Shocking
thing that had been! Not that he took much stock in missionaries; but,
hang it all, one couldn't have these damned Chinese massacring them.
Then he came to a cross with a name on it he knew. Good chap, Edward
Mulock, but he couldn't stand his liquor, drank himself to death, poor
devil, at twenty-five: the taipan had known a lot of them do that;
there were several more neat crosses with a man's name on them and the
age, twenty-five, twenty-six, or twenty-seven; it was always the same
story; they had come out to China: they had never seen so much money
before, they were good fellows and they wanted to drink with the rest:
they couldn't stand it, and there they were in the cemetery. You had to
have a strong head and a fine constitution to drink drink for drink on
the China coast. Of course it was very sad, but the taipan could hardly
help a smile when he thought how many of those young fellows he had
drunk underground. And there was a death that had been useful, a fellow
in his own firm, senior to him and a clever chap too: if that fellow
had lived he might not have been taipan now. Truly the ways of fate
were inscrutable. Ah, and here was little Mrs. Turner, Violet Turner,
she had been a pretty little thing, he had had quite an affair with
her; he had been devilish cut up when she died. He looked at her age
on the tombstone. She'd be no chicken if she were alive now. And as he
thought of all those dead people a sense of satisfaction spread through
him. He had beaten them all. They were dead and he was alive, and by
George he'd scored them off. His eyes collected in one picture all
those crowded graves and he smiled scornfully. He very nearly rubbed
his hands.

"No one ever thought I was a fool," he muttered.

He had a feeling of good-natured contempt for the gibbering dead.
Then, as he strolled along, he came suddenly upon two coolies digging
a grave. He was astonished, for he had not heard that anyone in the
community was dead.

"Who the devil's that for?" he said aloud.

The coolies did not even look at him, they went on with their work,
standing in the grave, deep down, and they shovelled up heavy clods of
earth. Though he had been so long in China he knew no Chinese, in his
day it was not thought necessary to learn the damned language, and he
asked the coolies in English whose grave they were digging. They did
not understand. They answered him in Chinese and he cursed them for
ignorant fools. He knew that Mrs. Broome's child was ailing and it
might have died, but he would certainly have heard of it, and besides
that wasn't a child's grave, it was a man's and a big man's too. It was
uncanny. He wished he hadn't gone into that cemetery; he hurried out
and stepped into his chair. His good humour had all gone and there was
an uneasy frown on his face. The moment he got back to his office he
called to his number two:

"I say, Peters, who's dead, d'you know?"

But Peters knew nothing. The taipan was puzzled. He called one of the
native clerks and sent him to the cemetery to ask the coolies. He began
to sign his letters. The clerk came back and said the coolies had gone
and there was no one to ask. The taipan began to feel vaguely annoyed:
he did not like things to happen of which he knew nothing. His own boy
would know, his boy always knew everything, and he sent for him; but
the boy had heard of no death in the community.

"I knew no one was dead," said the taipan irritably. "But what's the
grave for?"

He told the boy to go to the overseer of the cemetery and find out what
the devil he had dug a grave for when no one was dead.

"Let me have a whisky and soda before you go," he added, as the boy was
leaving the room.

He did not know why the sight of the grave had made him uncomfortable.
But he tried to put it out of his mind. He felt better when he had
drunk the whisky, and he finished his work. He went upstairs and turned
over the pages of _Punch_. In a few minutes he would go to the club and
play a rubber or two of bridge before dinner. But it would ease his
mind to hear what his boy had to say and he waited for his return. In a
little while the boy came back and he brought the overseer with him.

"What are you having a grave dug for?" he asked the overseer point
blank. "Nobody's dead."

"I no dig glave," said the man.

"What the devil do you mean by that? There were two coolies digging a
grave this afternoon."

The two Chinese looked at one another. Then the boy said they had been
to the cemetery together. There was no new grave there.

The taipan only just stopped himself from speaking.

"But damn it all, I saw it myself," were the words on the tip of his
tongue.

But he did not say them. He grew very red as he choked them down. The
two Chinese looked at him with their steady eyes. For a moment his
breath failed him.

"All right. Get out," he gasped.

But as soon as they were gone he shouted for the boy again, and when
he came, maddeningly impassive, he told him to bring some whisky. He
rubbed his sweating face with a handkerchief. His hand trembled when
he lifted the glass to his lips. They could say what they liked, but
he had seen the grave. Why, he could hear still the dull thud as the
coolies threw the spadefuls of earth on the ground above them. What
did it mean? He could feel his heart beating. He felt strangely ill at
ease. But he pulled himself together. It was all nonsense. If there
was no grave there it must have been an hallucination. The best thing
he could do was to go to the club, and if he ran across the doctor he
would ask him to give him a look over.

Everyone in the club looked just the same as ever. He did not
know why he should have expected them to look different. It was a
comfort. These men, living for many years with one another lives
that were methodically regulated, had acquired a number of little
idiosyncrasies--one of them hummed incessantly while he played
bridge, another insisted on drinking beer through a straw--and these
tricks which had so often irritated the taipan now gave him a sense
of security. He needed it, for he could not get out of his head that
strange sight he had seen; he played bridge very badly; his partner
was censorious, and the taipan lost his temper. He thought the men
were looking at him oddly. He wondered what they saw in him that was
unaccustomed.

Suddenly he felt he could not bear to stay in the club any longer. As
he went out he saw the doctor reading _The Times_ in the reading-room,
but he could not bring himself to speak to him. He wanted to see for
himself whether that grave was really there and stepping into his chair
he told his bearers to take him to the cemetery. You couldn't have an
hallucination twice, could you? And besides, he would take the overseer
in with him and if the grave was not there he wouldn't see it, and if
it was he'd give the overseer the soundest thrashing he'd ever had. But
the overseer was nowhere to be found. He had gone out and taken the
keys with him. When the taipan found he could not get into the cemetery
he felt suddenly exhausted. He got back into his chair and told his
bearers to take him home. He would lie down for half an hour before
dinner. He was tired out. That was it. He had heard that people had
hallucinations when they were tired. When his boy came in to put out
his clothes for dinner it was only by an effort of will that he got up.
He had a strong inclination not to dress that evening, but he resisted
it: he made it a rule to dress, he had dressed every evening for twenty
years and it would never do to break his rule. But he ordered a bottle
of champagne with his dinner and that made him feel more comfortable.
Afterwards he told the boy to bring him the best brandy. When he had
drunk a couple of glasses of this he felt himself again. Hallucinations
be damned! He went to the billiard room and practised a few difficult
shots. There could not be much the matter with him when his eye was so
sure. When he went to bed he sank immediately into a sound sleep.

But suddenly he awoke. He had dreamed of that open grave and the
coolies digging leisurely. He was sure he had seen them. It was absurd
to say it was an hallucination when he had seen them with his own
eyes. Then he heard the rattle of the night watchman going his rounds.
It broke upon the stillness of the night so harshly that it made him
jump out of his skin. And then terror seized him. He felt a horror of
the winding multitudinous streets of the Chinese city, and there was
something ghastly and terrible in the convoluted roofs of the temples
with their devils grimacing and tortured. He loathed the smells that
assaulted his nostrils. And the people. Those myriads of blue clad
coolies, and the beggars in their filthy rags, and the merchants and
the magistrates, sleek, smiling, and inscrutable, in their long black
gowns. They seemed to press upon him with menace. He hated the country.
China. Why had he ever come? He was panic-stricken now. He must get
out. He would not stay another year, another month. What did he care
about Shanghai?

"Oh, my God," he cried, "if I were only safely back in England."

He wanted to go home. If he had to die he wanted to die in England.
He could not bear to be buried among all these yellow men, with their
slanting eyes and their grinning faces. He wanted to be buried at home,
not in that grave he had seen that day. He could never rest there.
Never. What did it matter what people thought? Let them think what they
liked. The only thing that mattered was to get away while he had the
chance.

He got out of bed and wrote to the head of the firm and said he had
discovered he was dangerously ill. He must be replaced. He could not
stay longer than was absolutely necessary. He must go home at once.

They found the letter in the morning clenched in the taipan's hand. He
had slipped down between the desk and the chair. He was stone dead.




L

METEMPSYCHOSIS


He was decently though far from richly clad. He had a small round cap
of black silk on his head, and on his feet black silk shoes. His robe
was pale green of the flowered silk which is made in Chia-ting, and
over it he wore a short black jacket. He was an old man, with a white
beard, long and for a Chinese full; his broad face, much wrinkled,
especially between the brows, was benign, and his large horn spectacles
did not conceal the friendliness of his eyes. He had all the look of
one of those sages whom you may see in an old picture seated by a
bamboo grove at the foot of a great rocky mountain contemplating the
Eternal Way. But now his face bore an expression of great annoyance
and his kindly eyes were frowning, for he was engaged in the singular
occupation (for a man of his appearance) of leading a little black pig
along the causeway between the flooded padi fields. And the little
black pig, with sudden jerks, with unexpected dodging, ran hither and
thither, in every direction but that in which the old gentleman wished
to go. He pulled the string violently, but the pig, squealing, refused
to follow; he addressed it in terms of expostulation and of abuse, but
the little pig sat on his haunches and looked at him with malicious
eyes. Then I knew that in the Tang dynasty the old gentleman had been
a philosopher who had juggled with facts, as philosophers will, making
them suit the whims which he called his theories; and now, after who
knows how many existences, he was expiating his sins in suffering in
his turn the stubborn tyranny of the facts which he had outraged.




LI

THE FRAGMENT


When you travel in China I think nothing amazes you more than the
passion for decoration which possesses the Chinese. It is not
astonishing that you should find decoration in memorial arches or in
temples; here the occasion for it is obvious; and it is natural enough
to find it in furniture; nor does it surprise, though it delights you,
to discover it on the commoner objects of household use. The pewter
pot is enriched with a graceful design; the coolie's rice bowl has
its rough but not inelegant adornment. You may fancy that the Chinese
craftsman does not look upon an article as complete till by line or
colour he has broken the plainness of a surface. He will even print an
arabesque on the paper he uses for wrapping. But it is more unexpected
when you see the elaborate embellishment of a shop-front, the splendid
carving, gilt or relieved with gold, of its counter, and the intricate
sculpture of the signboard. It may be that this magnificence serves
as an advertisement; but it does so only because the passer-by, the
possible customer, takes pleasure in elegance; and you are apt to
think that the tradesman who owns the shop takes pleasure in it too.
When he sits at his door, smoking his water pipe and through his great
horn spectacles reading a newspaper, his eyes must rest with good
humour sometimes on the fantastic ornamentation. On the counter, in a
long-necked pot, stands a solitary carnation.

You will find the same delight in the ornate in the poorest villages
where the severity of a door is mitigated by a charming piece of
carving, and where the trellis of the windows forms a complicated
and graceful pattern. You can seldom cross a bridge, in however
unfrequented a district, without seeing in it the hand of an artist.
The stones are so laid as to make an intricate decoration, and it seems
as though these singular people judged with a careful eye whether a
flat bridge or an arched one would fit in best with the surrounding
scene. The balustrade is ornamented with lions or with dragons. I
remember a bridge that must have been placed just where it was for
the pure delight of its beauty rather than for any useful purpose,
since, though broad enough for a carriage and pair to pass over it, it
served only to connect a narrow path that led from one ragged village
to another. The nearest town was thirty miles away. The broad river,
narrowing at this point, flowed between two green hills, and nut trees
grew on the bank. The bridge had no balustrade. It was constructed of
immense slabs of granite and rested on five piers; the middle pier
consisted of a huge and fantastic dragon with a long and scaly tail. On
the sides of the outer slabs, running the whole length of the bridge,
was cut in very low relief a pattern of an unimaginable lightness,
delicacy and grace.

But though the Chinese take such careful pains to avoid fatiguing your
eye, with sure taste making the elaborateness of a decoration endurable
by contrasting it with a plain surface, in the end weariness overcomes
you. Their exuberance bewilders. You cannot refuse your admiration to
the ingenuity with which they so diversify the ideas that occupy them
as to give you an impression of changing fantasy, but the fact is plain
that the ideas are few. The Chinese artist is like a fiddler who with
infinite skill should play infinite variations upon a single tune.

Now, I happened upon a French doctor who had been in practice for many
years in the city in which I then found myself; and he was a collector
of porcelain, bronze, and embroidery. He took me to see his things.
They were beautiful, but they were a trifle monotonous. I admired
perfunctorily. Suddenly I came upon the fragment of a bust.

"But that is Greek," I said, in surprise.

"Do you think so? I am glad to hear you say it."

Head and arms were gone, and the statue, for such it had been, was
broken off just above the waist, but there was a breastplate, with a
sun in the middle of it, and in relief Perseus killing the dragon. It
was a fragment of no great importance, but it was Greek, and perhaps
because I was surfeited with Chinese beauty it affected me strangely.
It spoke in a tongue with which I was familiar. It rested my heart. I
passed my hands over its age-worn surface with a delight I was myself
surprised at. I was like a sailor who, wandering in a tropic sea, has
known the lazy loveliness of coral islands and the splendours of the
cities of the East, but finds himself once more in the dingy alleys of
a Channel port. It is cold and grey and sordid, but it is England.

The doctor--he was a little bald man, with gleaming eyes and an
excitable manner--rubbed his hands.

"Do you know it was found within thirty miles of here, on this side of
the Tibetan frontier?"

"Found!" I exclaimed. "Found where?"

"_Mon Dieu_, in the ground. It had been buried for two thousand years.
They found this and several fragments more, one or two complete
statues, I believe, but they were broken up and only this remained."

It was incredible that Greek statues should have been discovered in so
remote a spot.

"But what is your explanation?" I asked.

"I think this was a statue of Alexander," he said.

"By George!"

It was a thrill. Was it possible that one of the commanders of the
Macedonian, after the expedition into India, had found his way into
this mysterious corner of China under the shadow of the mountains of
Tibet? The doctor wanted to show me Manchu dresses, but I could not
give them my attention. What bold adventurer was he who had penetrated
so far towards the East to found a kingdom? There he had built a temple
to Aphrodite and a temple to Dionysus, and in the theatre actors had
sung the Antigone and in his halls at night bards had recited the
Odyssey. And he and his men listening may have felt themselves the
peers of the old seaman and his followers. What magnificence did that
stained fragment of marble call up and what fabulous adventures! How
long had the kingdom lasted and what tragedy marked its fall? Ah, just
then I could not look at Tibetan banners or celadon cups; for I saw the
Parthenon, severe and lovely, and beyond, serene, the blue gean.




LII

ONE OF THE BEST


I could never remember his name, but whenever he was spoken of in the
port he was always described as one of the best. He was a man of fifty
perhaps, thin and rather tall, dapper and well-dressed, with a small,
neat head and sharp features. His blue eyes were good-natured and
jovial behind his pince-nez. He was of a cheerful disposition, and he
had a vein of banter which was not ineffective. He could turn out the
sort of jokes that make men standing at the club bar laugh heartily,
and he could be agreeably malicious, but without ill-nature, about any
member of the community who did not happen to be present. His humour
was of the same nature as that of the comedian in a musical play. When
they spoke of him they often said:

"You know, I wonder he never went on the stage. He'd have made a hit.
One of the best."

He was always ready to have a drink with you and no sooner was your
glass empty than he was prompt with the China phrase:

"Ready for the other half?"

But he did not drink more than was good for him.

"Oh, he's got his head screwed on his shoulders the right way," they
said. "One of the best."

When the hat was passed round for some charitable object he could
always be counted on to give as much as anyone else, and he was always
ready to go in for a golf competition or a billiards tournament. He was
a bachelor.

"Marriage is no use to a man who lives in China," he said. "He has to
send his wife away every summer and then when the kids are beginning to
be interesting they have to go home. It costs a deuce of a lot of money
and you get nothing out of it."

But he was always willing to do a good turn to any woman in the
community. He was number one at Jardine's, and he often had the power
to make himself useful. He had been in China for thirty years, and he
prided himself on not speaking a word of Chinese. He never went into
the Chinese city. His compradore was Chinese, and some of the clerks,
his boys of course, and the chair coolies; but they were the only
Chinese he had anything to do with, and quite enough too.

"I hate the country, I hate the people," he said. "As soon as I've
saved enough money I mean to clear out."

He laughed.

"Do you know, last time I was home I found everyone cracked over
Chinese junk, pictures and porcelain, and stuff. Don't talk to me about
Chinese things, I said to 'em. I never want to see anything Chinese as
long as I live."

He turned to me.

"I'll tell you what, I don't believe I've got a single Chinese thing in
my house."

But if you wanted him to talk to you about London he was prepared to do
so by the hour. He knew all the musical comedies that had been played
for twenty years and at the distance of nine thousand miles he was able
to keep up with the doings of Miss Lily Elsie and Miss Elsie Janis.
He played the piano and he had a pleasing voice; it required little
persuasion to induce him to sit down and sing you the popular ditties
he had heard when last he was at home. It was quite singular to me, the
unfathomable frivolity of this grey-haired man; it was even a little
uncanny. But people applauded him loudly when he finished.

"He's priceless, isn't he?" they said. "Oh, one of the best."




LIII

THE SEA-DOG


Ships' captains for the most part are very dull men. Their conversation
is of freights and cargoes. They have seen little more in the ports
they visit than their agent's office, the bar which their kind
frequents, and the bawdy houses. They owe the glamour of romance which
their connection with the sea has cast over them to the imagination of
the landsman. To them the sea is a means of livelihood and they know
it, as an engine-driver knows his engine, from a standpoint which is
aridly practical. They are men, working men, of a narrow outlook, with
small education for the most part and little culture; they are all of a
piece, and they have neither subtlety nor imagination. Straightforward,
courageous, honest, and reliable, they stand four-square on the
immutability of the obvious; and they are definite: they are placed in
their surroundings like the objects in a stereoscopic photograph so
that you seem to see all round them. They offer themselves to you with
salient traits.

But no one could have adhered less to type than Captain Boots. He was
the master of a little Chinese steamer on the Upper Yangtze and because
I was his only passenger we spent a good deal of time in one another's
company. But though he was fluent of speech, garrulous even, I see him
shadowly; and he remains in my mind indistinctly. I suppose it is on
account of his elusiveness that he engages my imagination. There was
certainly nothing elusive in his appearance. He was a big man, six
foot two, powerfully built, with large features and a red, friendly
face. When he laughed he showed a row of handsome gold teeth. He was
very bald, and clean-shaven; but he had the most bushy, abundant, and
aggressive eyebrows that I have ever seen, and under them mild blue
eyes. He was a Dutchman and though he had left Holland when he was
eight, he still spoke with an accent. He could not pronounce th, but
always made it d. His father, a fisherman who sailed his own schooner
on the Zuyder Zee, hearing that fishing was good in Newfoundland, had
set out with his wife and his two sons across the broad Atlantic.
After some years there and in Hudson's Bay--all this was hard on half
a century ago--they had sailed round the Horn for the Behring Straits.
They hunted seal until the law stepped in to save the beasts they were
exterminating, and then Boots, a man now and a brave one, God knows,
sailed here and there, as third, then as second mate, on sailing
vessels. He had been almost all his life in sail and now on a steamer
could not make himself at home.

"It's only in a sailing boat you get comfort," he said. "Dere's no
comfort anywhere when you got steam."

He had been all along the coast of South America after nitrates, then
to the west coast of Africa, then again, fishing cod off the coast of
Maine, to America; and after that with cargoes of salt fish to Spain
and Portugal. A tavern acquaintance in Manila suggested that he should
try the Chinese Customs. He went to Hong-Kong, where he was taken on as
a tide-waiter, and presently was put in command of a steam launch. He
spent three years, chasing the opium smugglers, and then, having saved
a little money, built himself a forty-five ton schooner with which he
determined to go to the Behring Straits and try his luck again with the
seal fishery.

"But I guess my crew got scared," he said. "When I got to Shanghai they
deserted and I couldn't get no oder, so I had to sell de boat and I
shipped on a vessel what was going to Vancouver."

It was then he first left the sea. He met a man who was pushing a
patent hay-fork and this he agreed to take round the States. It was a
queer occupation for a sailor-man, and it was not a successful one, for
at Salt Lake City, the firm that employed him having gone bankrupt, he
found himself stranded. Somehow or other he got back to Vancouver, but
he was taken with the idea of life ashore, and he found work with an
estate-agent. It was his duty to take the purchasers of land to their
plots and if they were not satisfied persuade them that they need not
regret their bargain.

"We sold one fellow a farm on de side of a mountain," he said, his
blue eyes twinkling at the recollection, "an' it was so steep dat de
chickens had one leg longer dan de oder."

After five years he had the idea that he would like to go back to
China. He had no difficulty in getting a job as mate of a ship sailing
west and soon he was at the old life once more. Since then he had been
on most of the China runs, from Vladivostok to Shanghai, from Amoy
to Manila, and on all the big rivers; on steamers now, rising from
second to first mate, and at last, on Chinese owned ships, to master.
He talked willingly of his plans for the future. He had been in China
long enough, and he hankered after a farm on the Fraser River. He would
build himself a boat and do a bit of fishing, salmon and halibut.

"It's time I settled down," he said. "Fifty-dree years I've been to
sea. An' I shouldn't wonder but what I did a bit of boat building too.
I'm not one to stick to one ding."

There he was right and this restlessness of his translated itself into
a curious indecision of character. There was something fluid about him
so that you did not know where to take hold of him. He reminded you of
a scene of mist and rain in a Japanese print where the design, barely
suggested, almost escapes you. He had a peculiar gentleness which was
somewhat unexpected in the rough old salt.

"I don't want to offend anyone," he said. "Treat 'em kindly, dat's
what I try to do. If people won't do what you want talk to 'em nicely,
persuade 'em. Dere's no need to be nasty. Try what coaxing'll do."

It was a principle which it was unusual to find used with the Chinese,
and I do not know that it answered very well, for after some difficulty
he would come into the cabin, wave his hands, and say:

"I can do noding wid dem. Dey won't listen to reason."

And then his moderation looked very like weakness. But he was no fool.
He had a sense of humour. At one place we were drawing over seven feet
and since the river at its shallowest was barely that and the course
was dangerous the harbour authorities would not give us our papers till
part of the cargo was unloaded. It was the ship's last trip and she was
carrying the pay of regiments stationed several days down stream. The
military governor refused to let the ship start unless the bullion was
taken.

"I guess I got to do what you tell me," said Captain Boots to the
harbour master.

"You don't get your papers till I see the five foot mark above the
water," answered the harbour master.

"I'll tell the compradore to take out some of dat silver."

He took the harbour master up to the Customs' Club and stood him
drinks while this was being done. He drank with him for four hours,
and when he returned he walked as steadily as when he went. But the
harbour-master was drunk.

"Ah, I see dey've got it down two foot," said Captain Boots. "Dat's all
right den."

The harbour-master looked at the numbers on the ship's side and sure
enough the five foot mark was at the water's edge.

"That's good," he said. "And now you can go."

"I'll be off right away," said the captain.

Not a pound of cargo had been removed, but an astute Chinaman had
neatly repainted the numbers.

And later when mutinous regiments with an eye on the silver we carried
sought to prevent us from leaving one of the riverside cities he showed
an agreeable firmness. His equable temper was tried and he said:

"No one's going to make me stay where I don't want to. I'm de master of
dis ship and I'm de man what gives de orders. I'm going."

The agitated compradore said the military would fire if we attempted to
move. An officer uttered a command and the soldiers, going down on one
knee, levelled their rifles. Captain Boots looked at them.

"Put down de bullet proof screen," he said. "I tell you I'm going and
de Chinese army can go to hell."

He gave his orders to raise the anchor and at the same time the officer
gave the order to fire. Captain Boots stood on his bridge, a somewhat
grotesque figure, for in his old blue jersey, with his red face and
burly frame, he looked the very image of those ancient fishermen that
you see lounging about Grimsby docks, and he rang his bell. We steamed
out slowly to the spatter of rifle shots.




LIV

THE QUESTION


They took me to the temple. It stood on the side of a hill with a
semi-circle of tawny mountains behind it, staging it, as it were, with
a formal grandeur; and they pointed out to me with what exquisite art
the series of buildings climbed the hill till you reached the final
edifice, a jewel of white marble encircled by the trees; for the
Chinese architect sought to make his creation an ornament to nature
and he used the accidents of the landscape to complete his decorative
scheme. They pointed out to me how cunningly the trees were planted
to contrast with the marble of a gateway, to give an agreeable shadow
here, or there to serve as a background; and they made me remark the
admirable proportion of those great roofs, rising one beyond the other,
in rich profusion, with the grace of flowers; and they showed me that
the yellow tiles were of different hues so that the sensibility was not
offended by an expanse of colour but amused and pleased by a subtle
variety of tone. They showed me how the elaborate carving of a gateway
was contrasted with a surface without adornment so that the eye was
not wearied. All this they showed me as we walked through elegant
courtyards, over bridges which were a miracle of grace, through temples
with strange gods, dark and gesticulating; but when I asked them what
was the spiritual state which had caused all this mass of building to
be made, they could not tell me.




LV

THE SINOLOGUE


He is a tall man, rather stout, flabby as though he does not take
enough exercise, with a red, clean-shaven, broad face and grey hair.
He talks very quickly, in a nervous manner, with a voice not quite
big enough for his body. He lives in a temple just outside the city
gate, inhabiting the guest chambers, and three Buddhist priests, with
a tiny acolyte, tend the temple and conduct the rites. There is a
little Chinese furniture in the rooms and a vast number of books, but
no comfort. It is cold and the study in which we sit is insufficiently
warmed by a petroleum stove.

He knows more Chinese than any man in China. He has been working
for ten years on a dictionary which will supersede that of a noted
scholar whom for a quarter of a century he has personally disliked.
He is thus benefiting sinological studies and satisfying a private
grudge. He has all the manner of a don and you feel that eventually
he will be professor of Chinese at the University of Oxford and then
at last exactly in his place. He is a man of wider culture than most
sinologues, who may know Chinese, and this you must take on trust, but
who, it is lamentably obvious, know nothing else; and his conversation
upon Chinese thought and literature has in consequence a fullness and
a variety which you do not often find among students of the language.
Because he has immersed himself in his particular pursuits and has
cared nothing for racing and shooting the Europeans think him queer.
They look upon him with the suspicion and awe with which human beings
always regard those who do not share their tastes. They suggest that
he is not quite sane and some accuse him of smoking opium. It is the
charge which is always brought against the white man who has sought to
familiarise himself with the civilisation in which he is to pass the
greater part of his career. You have only to spend a little while in
that apartment bare of the most common luxury to know that this is a
man who leads a life wholly of the spirit.

But it is a specialised life. Art and beauty seem not to touch him,
and as I listen to him talk so sympathetically of the Chinese poets I
cannot help asking myself if the best things have not after all slipped
through his fingers. Here is a man who has touched reality only through
the printed page. The tragic splendour of the lotus moves him only when
its loveliness is enshrined in the verse of Li Po and the laughter
of demure Chinese girls stirs his blood but in the perfection of an
exquisitely chiselled quatrain.




LVI

THE VICE-CONSUL


His bearers set down his chair in the yamen and unfastened the apron
which protected him from the pouring rain. He put out his head, like a
bird looking out of its nest, and then his long thin body and finally
his thin long legs. He stood for a moment as if he did not quite know
what to do with himself. He was a very young man and his long limbs
with their ungainliness somehow added to the callowness of his air.
His round face (his head looked too small for the length of his body)
with its fresh complexion was quite boyish, and his pleasant brown eyes
were ingenuous and candid. The sense of importance which his official
position gave him (it was not long since he had been no more than a
student-interpreter) struggled with his native shyness. He gave his
card to the judge's secretary and was led by him into an inner court
and asked to sit down. It was cold and draughty and the vice-consul
was glad of his heavy waterproof. A ragged attendant brought tea and
cigarettes. The secretary, an emaciated youth in a very shabby black
gown, had been a student at Harvard and was glad to show off his fluent
English.

Then the judge came in, and the vice-consul stood up. The judge was
a portly gentleman in heavily wadded clothes, with a large smiling
face and gold-rimmed spectacles. They sat down and sipped their tea
and smoked American cigarettes. They chatted affably. The judge spoke
no English, but the vice-consul's Chinese was fresh in his mind and
he could not help thinking that he acquitted himself creditably.
Presently an attendant appeared and said a few words to the judge, and
the judge very courteously asked the vice-consul if he was ready for
the business which had brought him. The door into the outer court was
thrown open and the judge, walking through, took his place on a large
seat at a table that stood at the top of the steps. He did not smile
now. He had assumed instinctively the gravity proper to his office
and in his walk, notwithstanding his obesity, there was an impressive
dignity. The vice-consul, obeying a polite gesture, took a seat by
his side. The secretary stood at the end of the table. Then the outer
gateway was flung wide (it seemed to the vice-consul that there was
nothing so dramatic as the opening of a door) and quickly, with an
odd sort of flurry, the criminal walked in. He walked to the centre
of the courtyard and stood still, facing his judge. On each side of
him walked a soldier in khaki. He was a young man and the vice-consul
thought that he could be no older than himself. He wore only a pair of
cotton trousers and a cotton singlet. They were faded but clean. He
was bare-headed and bare-foot. He looked no different from any of the
thousands of coolies in their monotonous blue that you passed every
day in the crowded streets of the city. The judge and the criminal
faced one another in silence. The vice-consul looked at the criminal's
face, but then he looked down quickly: he did not want to see what was
there to be seen so plainly. He felt suddenly embarrassed. And looking
down he noticed how small the man's feet were, shapely and slender;
his hands were tied behind his back. He was slightly built, of the
middle height, a lissome creature that suggested the wild animal, and
standing on those beautiful feet of his there was in his carriage a
peculiar grace. But the vice-consul's eyes were drawn back unwillingly
to the oval, smooth, and unlined face. It was livid. The vice-consul
had often read of faces that were green with terror and he had thought
it but a fanciful expression, and here he saw it. It startled him. It
made him feel ashamed. And in the eyes too, eyes that did not slant as
the Chinese eye is wrongly supposed always to do, but were straight,
in the eyes that seemed unnaturally large and bright, fixed on those
of the judge, was a terror that was horrible to see. But when the
judge put him a question--trial and sentence were over and he had been
brought there that morning only for purposes of identification--he
answered in a loud plain voice, boldly. However his body might betray
him he was still master of his will. The judge gave a brief order, and,
flanked by his two soldiers, the man marched out. The judge and the
vice-consul rose and walked to the gateway, where their chairs awaited
them. Here stood the criminal with his guard. Notwithstanding his
tied hands he smoked a cigarette. A squad of little soldiers had been
sheltering themselves under the overhanging roof, and on the appearance
of the judge the officer in charge made them form up. The judge and
the vice-consul settled themselves in their chairs. The officer gave
an order and the squad stepped out. A couple of yards behind them
walked the criminal. Then came the judge in his chair and finally the
vice-consul.

They went quickly through the busy streets and the shopkeepers gave
the procession an incurious stare. The wind was cold and the rain
fell steadily. The criminal in his cotton singlet must have been wet
through. He walked with a firm step, his head held high, jauntily
almost. It was some distance from the judge's yamen to the city wall
and to cover it took them nearly half an hour. Then they came to the
city gate and went through it. Four men in ragged blue--they looked
like peasants--were standing against the wall by the side of a poor
coffin, rough hewn and unpainted. The criminal gave it a glance as he
passed by. The judge and the vice-consul dismounted from their chairs
and the officer halted his soldiers. The rice fields began at the city
wall. The criminal was led to a pathway between two patches and told
to kneel down. But the officer did not think the spot suitable. He
told the man to rise. He walked a yard or two and knelt down again. A
soldier was detached from the squad and took up his position behind the
prisoner, three feet from him perhaps; he raised his gun; the officer
gave the word of command; he fired. The criminal fell forward and he
moved a little, convulsively. The officer went up to him, and seeing
that he was not quite dead emptied two barrels of his revolver into
the body. Then he formed up his soldiers once more. The judge gave
the vice-consul a smile, but it was a grimace rather than a smile; it
distorted painfully that fat good-humoured face.

They stepped into their chairs; but at the city gate their ways parted;
the judge bowed the vice-consul a courteous farewell. The vice-consul
was carried back towards the consulate through the streets, crowded
and tortuous, where life was going on just as usual. And as he went
along quickly, for the consular bearers were fine fellows, his mind
distracted a little by their constant shouts to make way, he thought
how terrible it was to make an end of life deliberately: it seemed an
immense responsibility to destroy what was the result of innumerable
generations. The human race has existed so long and each one of us is
here as the result of an infinite series of miraculous events. But
at the same time, puzzling him, he had a sense of the triviality of
life. One more or less mattered so little. But just as he reached the
consulate he looked at his watch, he had no idea it was so late, and he
told the bearers to take him to the club. It was time for a cocktail
and by heaven he could do with one. A dozen men were standing at the
bar when he went in. They knew on what errand he had been that morning.

"Well," they said, "did you see the blighter shot?"

"You bet I did," he said, in a loud and casual voice.

"Everything go off all right?"

"He wriggled a bit." He turned to the bartender. "Same as usual, John."




LVII

A CITY BUILT ON A ROCK


They say of it that the dogs bark when peradventure the sun shines
there. It is a grey and gloomy city, shrouded in mist, for it stands
upon its rock where two great rivers meet so that it is washed on all
sides but one by turbid, rushing waters. The rock is like the prow of
an ancient galley and seems, as though possessed of a strange unnatural
life, all tremulous with effort; it is as if it were ever on the point
of forging into the tumultuous stream. Rugged mountains hem the city
round about.

Outside the walls bedraggled houses are built on piles, and here, when
the river is low, a hazardous population lives on the needs of the
watermen; for at the foot of the rock a thousand junks are moored,
wedged in with one another tightly, and men's lives there have all
the turbulence of the river. A steep and tortuous stairway leads to
the great gate guarded by a temple, and up and down this all day long
go the water coolies, with their dripping buckets; and from their
splashing the stair and the street that leads from the gate are wet as
though after heavy rain. It is difficult to walk on the level for more
than a few minutes, and there are as many steps as in the hill towns
of the Italian Riviera. Because there is so little space the streets
are pressed together, narrow and dark, and they wind continuously so
that to find your way is like finding it in a labyrinth. The throng
is as thick as the throng on a pavement in London when a theatre is
emptying itself of its audience. You have to push your way through it,
stepping aside every moment as chairs come by and coolies bearing their
everlasting loads: itinerant sellers, selling almost anything that
anyone can want to buy, jostle you as you pass.

The shops are wide open to the street, without windows or doors, and
they are crowded too. They are like an exhibition of arts and crafts,
and you may see what a street looked like in medieval England when each
town made all that was necessary to its needs. The various industries
are huddled together so that you will pass through a street of butchers
where carcasses and entrails hang bloody on each side of you, with
flies buzzing about them and mangy dogs prowling hungrily below; you
will pass through a street where in each house there is a hand-loom and
they are busily weaving cloth or silk. There are innumerable eating
houses from which come heavy odours and here at all hours people are
eating. Then, generally at a corner, you will see tea-houses, and here
all day long again the tables are packed with men of all sorts drinking
tea and smoking. The barbers ply their trade in the public view and you
will see men leaning patiently on their crossed arms while their heads
are being shaved; others are having their ears cleaned, and some, a
revolting spectacle, the inside of their eyelids scraped.

It is a city of a thousand noises. There are the peddlers who announce
their presence by a wooden gong; the clappers of the blind musician
or of the masseuse; the shrill falsetto of a man singing in a tavern;
the loud beating of a gong from a house where a wedding or a funeral
is being celebrated. There are the raucous shouts of the coolies
and chair-bearers; the menacing whines of the beggars, caricatures
of humanity, their emaciated limbs barely covered by filthy tatters
and revolting with disease; the cracked melancholy of the bugler
who incessantly practises a call he can never get; and then, like a
bass to which all these are a barbaric melody, the insistent sound
of conversation, of people laughing, quarrelling, joking, shouting,
arguing, gossiping. It is a ceaseless din. It is extraordinary at
first, then confusing, exasperating, and at last maddening. You long
for a moment's utter silence. It seems to you that it would be a
voluptuous delight.

And then combining with the irksome throng and the din that exhausts
your ears is a stench which time and experience enable you to
distinguish into a thousand separate stenches. Your nostrils grow
cunning. Foul odours beat upon your harassed nerves like the sound of
uncouth instruments playing a horrible symphony.

You cannot tell what are the lives of these thousands who surge about
you. Upon your own people sympathy and knowledge give you a hold; you
can enter into their lives, at least imaginatively, and in a way really
possess them. By the effort of your fancy you can make them after a
fashion part of yourself. But these are as strange to you as you are
strange to them. You have no clue to their mystery. For their likeness
to yourself in so much does not help you; it serves rather to emphasize
their difference. Someone attracts your attention, a pale youth with
great horn spectacles and a book under his arm, whose studious look is
pleasant, or an old man, wearing a hood, with a grey sparse beard and
tired eyes: he looks like one of those sages that the Chinese artists
painted in a rocky landscape or under Kang-hsi modelled in porcelain;
but you might as well look at a brick wall. You have nothing to go
upon, you do not know the first thing about them, and your imagination
is baffled.

But when, reaching the top of the hill, you come once more to the
crenellated walls that surround the city and go out through the
frowning gate, you come to the graves. They stretch over the country,
one mile, two miles, three, four, five, interminable green mounds,
up and down the hills, with grey stones to which the people once a
year come to offer libation and to tell the dead how fare the living
whom they left behind; and they are as thickly crowded, the dead, as
are the living in the city; and they seem to press upon the living as
though they would force them into the turbid, swirling river. There
is something menacing about those serried ranks. It is as though they
were laying siege to the city, with a sullen ruthlessness, biding their
time; and as though in the end, encroaching irresistibly as fate, they
would drive those seething throngs before them till the houses and the
streets were covered by them, and the green mounds came down to the
water gate. Then at last silence, silence would dwell there undisturbed.

They are uncanny, those green graves, they are terrifying. They seem to
wait.




LVIII

A LIBATION TO THE GODS


She was an old woman, and her face was wizened and deeply lined. In
her grey hair three long silver knives formed a fantastic headgear.
Her dress of faded blue consisted of a long jacket, worn and patched,
and a pair of trousers that reached a little below her calves. Her
feet were bare, but on one ankle she wore a silver bangle. It was
plain that she was very poor. She was not stout, but squarely built,
and in her prime she must have done without effort the heavy work in
which her life had been spent. She walked leisurely, with the sedate
tread of an elderly woman, and she carried on her arm a basket. She
came down to the harbour; it was crowded with painted junks; her eyes
rested for a moment curiously on a man who stood on a narrow bamboo
raft, fishing with cormorants; and then she set about her business. She
put down her basket on the stones of the quay, at the water's edge,
and took from it a red candle. This she lit and fixed in a chink of
the stones. Then she took several joss-sticks, held each of them for a
moment in the flame of the candle and set them up around it. She took
three tiny bowls and filled them with a liquid that she had brought
with her in a bottle and placed them neatly in a row. Then from her
basket she took rolls of paper cash and paper "shoes," and unravelled
them, so that they should burn easily. She made a little bonfire, and
when it was well alight she took the three bowls and poured out some of
their contents before the smouldering joss-sticks. She bowed herself
three times and muttered certain words. She stirred the burning paper
so that the flames burned brightly. Then she emptied the bowls on the
stones and again bowed three times. No one took the smallest notice
of her. She took a few more paper cash from her basket and flung them
in the fire. Then without further ado, she took up her basket, and
with the same leisurely, rather heavy tread, walked away. The gods
were duly propitiated, and like an old peasant woman in France who has
satisfactorily done her day's housekeeping, she went about her business.




THE END.




PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.




Transcriber's notes

   1. Punctuation has been made regular and consistent with contemporary
      standards.

   2. Contemporary spelling retained, for example: skilful and fulness
      as used in this text.

   3. Hyphenation has been retained as it appears in the original
      publication.

   4. Changes:
         page 48, "though" for "through" ("though not stout")
         page 87, "is" added, ("days and days it is just")
         page 157, "Traduttore--traditore" for "Tradutore--tradittore"
         page 194, "entree" for "entre" ("soup and fish, entre")





End of Project Gutenberg's On a Chinese Screen, by William Somerset Maugham

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON A CHINESE SCREEN ***

***** This file should be named 48788-8.txt or 48788-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/7/8/48788/

Produced by Dianna Adair, zsak and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
